Definition

Ultrasound technology allows doctors to see
inside a patient without resorting to surgery. A transmitter sends high frequency sound waves into the body,
where they bounce off the different tissues and organs
to produce a distinctive pattern of echoes. A receiver
hears the returning echo pattern and forwards it to a
computer, which translates the data into an image on a
television screen. Because ultrasound can distinguish
subtle variations between soft, fluid-filled tissues, it is
particularly useful in providing diagnostic images of the
abdomen. Ultrasound can also be used in treatment.

Purpose

The potential medical applications of ultrasound
were first recognized in the 1940s as an outgrowth of
the sonar technology developed to detect submarines
during World War II. The first useful medical images
were produced in the early 1950s, and, by 1965, ultrasound quality had improved to the point that it came
into general medical use. Improvements in the technology, application, and interpretation of ultrasound
continue. Its low cost, versatility, safety and speed
have brought it into the top drawer of medical imaging
techniques.
While pelvic ultrasound is widely known and commonly used for fetal monitoring during pregnancy,
ultrasound is also routinely used for general abdominal imaging. It has great advantage over x-ray imaging technologies in that it does not damage tissues
with ionizing radiation. Ultrasound is also generally
far better than plain x rays at distinguishing the subtle
variations of soft tissue structures, and can be used in
any of several modes, depending on the need at hand.
As an imaging tool, abdominal ultrasound generally is warranted for patients afflicted with: chronic or
acute abdominal pain; abdominal trauma; an obvious
or suspected abdominal mass; symptoms of liver disease, pancreatic disease, gallstones, spleen disease, kidney disease and urinary blockage; or symptoms of an
abdominal aortic aneurysm. Specifically:

Abdominal pain. Whether acute or chronic, pain can
signal a serious problem–from organ malfunction or
injury to the presence of malignant growths.
Ultrasound scanning can help doctors quickly sort
through potential causes when presented with general or ambiguous symptoms. All of the major
abdominal organs can be studied for signs of disease
that appear as changes in size, shape and internal
structure.

Abdominal trauma. After a serious accident, such as
a car crash or a fall, internal bleeding from injured
abdominal organs is often the most serious threat to
survival. Neither the injuries nor the bleeding are
immediately apparent. Ultrasound is very useful as
an initial scan when abdominal trauma is suspected,
and it can be used to pinpoint the location, cause,
and severity of hemorrhaging. In the case of puncture wounds, from a bullet for example, ultrasound
can locate the foreign object and provide a preliminary survey of the damage. The easy portability and
versatility of ultrasound technology has brought it
into common emergency room use, and even into
limited ambulance service

Abdominal mass. Abnormal growths–tumors, cysts,
abscesses, scar tissue and accessory organs–can be
located and tentatively identified with ultrasound. In
particular, potentially malignant solid tumors can be
distinguished from benign fluid-filled cysts and
abscesses. Masses and malformations in any organ
or part of the abdomen can be found.

Liver disease. The types and underlying causes of
liver disease are numerous, though jaundice tends
to be a general symptom. Ultrasound can differentiate between many of the types and causes of liver
malfunction, and is particularly good at identifying
obstruction of the bile ducts and cirrhosis, which is
characterized by abnormal fibrous growths and
reduced blood flow.

Pancreatic disease. Inflammation and malformation
of the pancreas are readily identified by ultrasound,
as are pancreatic stones (calculi), which can disrupt
proper functioning.

Gallstones. Gallstones cause more hospital admissions
than any other digestive malady. These calculi can
cause painful inflammation of the gallbladder and
also obstruct the bile ducts that carry digestive enzymes
from the gallbladder and liver to the intestines.
Gallstones are readily identifiable with ultrasound.

Spleen disease. The spleen is particularly prone to
injury during abdominal trauma. It may also become
painfully inflamed when beset with infection or
cancer. These conditions also lend themselves well
to ultrasonic inspection and diagnosis.

Kidney disease. The kidneys are also prone to traumatic injury and are the organs most likely to form
calculi, which can block the flow of urine and cause
blood poisoning (uremia). A variety of diseases causing
distinct changes in kidney morphology can also lead to
complete kidney failure. Ultrasound imaging has proven extremely useful in diagnosing kidney disorders.

Abdominal aortic aneurysm. This is a bulging weak
spot in the abdominal aorta, which supplies blood
directly from the heart to the entire lower body.
These aneurysms are relatively common and increase
in prevalence with age. A burst aortic aneurysm is
imminently life-threatening. However, they can be
readily identified and monitored with ultrasound
before acute complications result.

Ultrasound technology can also be used for treatment purposes, most frequently as a visual aid during
surgical procedures–such as guiding needle placement
to drain fluid from a cyst, or to extract tumor cells for
biopsy. Increasingly, direct therapeutic applications
for ultrasound are being developed.

The direct therapeutic value of ultrasonic waves
lies in their mechanical nature. They are shock waves,
just like audible sound, and vibrate the materials
through which they pass. These vibrations are mild,
virtually unnoticeable at the frequencies and intensities used for imaging. Properly focused however, high intensity ultrasound can be used to heat and physically
agitate targeted tissues.

High-intensity ultrasound is used routinely to treat
soft tissue injuries, such as strains, tears and associated
scarring. The heating and agitation are believed to
promote rapid healing through increased circulation.
Strongly focused, high-intensity, high-frequency ultrasound can also be used to physically destroy certain
types of tumors, as well as gallstones and other types
of calculi. Developing new treatment applications
for ultrasound is an active area of medical research.

Precautions

Properly performed, ultrasound imaging is virtually without risk or side effects. Some patients report
feeling a slight tingling and/or warmth while being
scanned, but most feel nothing at all. Ultrasound
waves of appropriate frequency and intensity are not
known to cause or aggravate any medical condition,
though any woman who thinks she might be pregnant
should raise the issue with her doctor before undergoing an abdominal ultrasound.
The value of ultrasound imaging as a medical tool,
however, depends greatly on the quality of the equipment used and the skill of the medical personnel operating it. Improperly performed and/or interpreted,
ultrasound can be worse than useless if it indicates
that a problem exists where there is none, or fails to
detect a significant condition. Basic ultrasound equipment is relatively inexpensive to obtain, and any doctor with the equipment can perform the procedure
whether qualified or not. Patients should not hesitate
to verify the credentials of technicians and doctors
performing ultrasounds, as well as the quality of the
equipment used and the benefits of the proposed
procedure.

In cases where ultrasound is used as a treatment
tool, patients should educate themselves about the
proposed procedure with the help of their doctors–as
is appropriate before any surgical procedure. Also,
any abdominal ultrasound procedure, diagnostic or
therapeutic, may be hampered by a patient’s body
type or other factors, such as the presence of excessive
bowel gas (which is opaque to ultrasound). In particular, very obese people are often not good candidates
for abdominal ultrasound.

Description
Ultrasound includes all sound waves above the
frequency of human hearing–about 20 thousand
hertz, or cycles per second. Medical ultrasound generally uses frequencies between one and 10 million hertz
(1-10 MHz). Higher frequency ultrasound waves pro￾duce more detailed images, but are also more readily
absorbed and so cannot penetrate as deeply into the
body. Abdominal ultrasound imaging is generally per￾formed at frequencies between 2-5 MHz.
KEY TERMS
Accessory organ—A lump of tissue adjacent to an
organ that is similar to it, but which serves no important purpose, if functional at all. While not necessarily harmful, such organs can cause problems if they
grow too large or become cancerous. In any case,
their presence points to an underlying abnormality in
the parent organ.
Benign—In medical usage, benign is the opposite of
malignant. It describes an abnormal growth that is
stable, treatable and generally not life-threatening.
Biopsy— The surgical removal and analysis of a
tissue sample for diagnostic purposes. Usually, the
term refers to the collection and analysis of tissue
from a suspected tumor to establish malignancy.
Calculus—Any type of hard concretion (stone) in the
body, but usually found in the gallbladder, pancreas
and kidneys. They are formed by the accumulation of
excess mineral salts and other organic material such
as blood or mucous. Calculi (pl.) can cause problems
by lodging in and obstructing the proper flow of fluids,
such as bile to the intestines or urine to the bladder.
Cirrhosis—A chronic liver disease characterized by
the invasion of connective tissue and the degeneration of proper functioning–jaundice is often an
accompanying symptom. Causes of cirrhosis include
alcoholism, metabolic diseases, syphilis and congestive heart disease.
Common bile duct—The branching passage through
which bile–a necessary digestive enzyme–travels
from the liver and gallbladder into the small intestine. Digestive enzymes from the pancreas also enter
the intestines through the common bile duct.
Computed tomography scan (CT scan)—A specialized type of x-ray imaging that uses highly focused
and relatively low energy radiation to produce detailed
two-dimensional images of soft tissue structures, particularly the brain. CT scans are the chief competitor to
ultrasound and can yield higher quality images not
disrupted by bone or gas. They are, however, more
cumbersome, time consuming and expensive to per￾form, and they use ionizing electromagnetic radiation.
Doppler—The Doppler effect refers to the apparent
change in frequency of sound wave echoes returning
to a stationary source from a moving target. If the
object is moving toward the source, the frequency
increases; if the object is moving away, the frequency decreases. The size of this frequency shift
can be used to compute the object’s speed–be it a
car on the road or blood in an artery. The Doppler
effect holds true for all types of radiation, not just
sound.
Frequency—Sound, whether traveling through air or
the human body, produces vibrations–molecules
bouncing into each other–as the shock wave travels
along. The frequency of a sound is the number of
vibrations per second. Within the audible range,
frequency means pitch–the higher the frequency,
the higher a sound’s pitch.
Ionizing radiation—Radiation that can damage liv￾ing tissue by disrupting and destroying individual
cells at the molecular level. All types of nuclear
radiation–x rays, gamma rays and beta rays–are
potentially ionizing. Sound waves physically vibrate
the material through which they pass, but do not
ionize it.
Jaundice—A condition that results in a yellow tint to
the skin, eyes and body fluids. Bile retention in the
liver, gallbladder and pancreas is the immediate
cause, but the underlying cause could be as simple
as obstruction of the common bile duct by a gall￾stone or as serious as pancreatic cancer. Ultrasound
can distinguish between these conditions.
Malignant—The term literally means growing worse
and resisting treatment. It is used as a synonym for
cancerous and connotes a harmful condition that
generally is life-threatening.
Morphology—Literally, the study of form. In medicine, morphology refers to the size, shape and structure rather than the function of a given organ. As a
diagnostic imaging technique, ultrasound facilitates
the recognition of abnormal morphologies as symptoms of underlying conditions.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 3
Abdominal ultrasound
An ultrasound machine consists of two parts: the
transducer and the analyzer. The transducer both pro￾duces the sound waves that penetrate the body and
receives the reflected echoes. Transducers are built
around piezoelectric ceramic chips. (Piezoelectric
refers to electricity that is produced when you put
pressure on certain crystals such as quartz). These
ceramic chips react to electric pulses by producing
sound waves ( they are transmitting waves) and react
to sound waves by producing electric pulses (receiving). Bursts of high frequency electric pulses supplied
to the transducer causes it to produce the scanning
sound waves. The transducer then receives the return￾ing echoes, translates them back into electric pulses
and sends them to the analyzer–a computer that organizes the data into an image on a television screen.
Because sound waves travel through all the body’s
tissues at nearly the same speed–about 3,400 miles per
hour–the microseconds it takes for each echo to be
received can be plotted on the screen as a distance into
the body. The relative strength of each echo, a function of the specific tissue or organ boundary that
produced it, can be plotted as a point of varying
brightness. In this way, the echoes are translated into
a picture. Tissues surrounded by bone or filled with
gas (the stomach, intestines and bowel) cannot be
imaged using ultrasound, because the waves are
blocked or become randomly scattered.
Four different modes of ultrasound are used in
medical imaging:

A-mode. This is the simplest type of ultrasound in
which a single transducer scans a line through the
body with the echoes plotted on screen as a function
of depth. This method is used to measure distances
within the body and the size of internal organs.
Therapeutic ultrasound aimed at a specific tumor
or calculus is also A-mode, to allow for pinpoint
accurate focus of the destructive wave energy.

B-mode. In B-mode ultrasound, a linear array of
transducers simultaneously scans a plane through
the body that can be viewed as a two-dimensional
image on screen. Ultrasound probes containing more
than 100 transducers in sequence form the basis for
these most commonly used scanners, which cost
about $50,000.

M-Mode. The M stands for motion. A rapid
sequence of B-mode scans whose images follow
each other in sequence on screen enables doctors to
see and measure range of motion, as the organ
boundaries that produce reflections move relative
to the probe. M-mode ultrasound has been put to
particular use in studying heart motion.

Doppler mode. Doppler ultrasonography includes the
capability of accurately measuring velocities of mov￾ing material, such as blood in arteries and veins. The
principle is the same as that used in radar guns that
measure the speed of a car on the highway. Doppler
capability is most often combined with B-mode scanning to produce images of blood vessels from which
blood flow can be directly measured. This technique
is used extensively to investigate valve defects, arteriosclerosis and hypertension, particularly in the
heart, but also in the abdominal aorta and the portal
vein of the liver. These machines cost about
$250,000.
The actual procedure for a patient undergoing an
abdominal ultrasound is relatively simple, regardless
of the type of scan or its purpose. Fasting for at least
eight hours prior to the procedure ensures that the
stomach is empty and as small as possible, and that
the intestines and bowels are relatively inactive.
Fasting also allows the gall bladder to be seen, as it
contracts after eating and may not be seen if the sto￾mach is full. In some cases, a full bladder helps to push
intestinal folds out of the way so that the gas they
contain does not disrupt the image. The patient’s
abdomen is then greased with a special gel that allows
the ultrasound probe to glide easily across the skin
while transmitting and receiving ultrasonic pulses.
This procedure is conducted by a doctor with the
assistance of a technologist skilled in operating the
equipment. The probe is moved around the abdomen
to obtain different views of the target areas. The
patient will likely be asked to change positions from
side to side and to hold their breath as necessary to
obtain the desired views. Discomfort during the procedure is minimal.
The many types and uses of ultrasound technology makes it difficult to generalize about the time and
costs involved. Relatively simple imaging–scanning a
suspicious abdominal mass or a suspected abdominal
aortic aneurysm–will take about half an hour to per￾form and will cost a few hundred dollars or more,
depending on the quality of the equipment, the
operator and other factors. More involved techniques
such as multiple M-mode and Doppler-enhanced
scans, or cases where the targets not well defined in
advance, generally take more time and are more
expensive.
Regardless of the type of scan used and the potential
difficulties encountered, ultrasound remains faster and
less expensive than computed tomography scans (CT),
its primary rival in abdominal imaging. Furthermore, as
abdominal ultrasounds are generally undertaken as
4 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE
Abdominal ultrasound
‘‘medically necessary’’ procedures designed to detect the
presence of suspected abnormalities, they are covered
under most types of major medical insurance. As always,
though, the patient would be wise to confirm that their
coverage extends to the specific procedure proposed.
For nonemergency situations, most underwriters stipulate prior approval as a condition of coverage.
Specific conditions for which ultrasound may be
selected as a treatment option–certain types of tumors,
lesions, kidney stones and other calculi, muscle and
ligament injuries, etc.–are described in detail under
the appropriate entries in this encyclopedia.
Preparation
A patient undergoing abdominal ultrasound will
be advised by their physician about what to expect and
how to prepare. As mentioned above, preparations
generally include fasting and arriving for the procedure with a full bladder, if necessary. This preparation
is particularly useful if the gallbladder, ovaries or veins
are to be examined.
Aftercare
In general, no aftercare related to the abdominal
ultrasound procedure itself is required.
Risks
Abdominal ultrasound carries with it no recognized risks or side effects, if properly performed using
appropriate frequency and intensity ranges. Sensitive
tissues, particularly those of the reproductive organs,
could possibly sustain damage if violently vibrated by
overly intense ultrasound waves. In general though,
such damage would only result from improper use of
the equipment.
Any woman who thinks she might be pregnant
should raise this issue with her doctor before undergoing an abdominal ultrasound, as a fetus in the early
stages of development could be injured by ultrasound
meant to probe deeply recessed abdominal organs.
Normal results
As a diagnostic imaging technique, a normal
abdominal ultrasound is one that indicates the absence
of the suspected condition that prompted the scan.
For example, symptoms such as a persistent cough,
labored breathing, and upper abdominal pain suggest
the possibility of, among other things, an abdominal
aortic aneurysm. An ultrasound scan that indicates
the absence of an aneurysm would rule out this lifethreatening condition and point to other, less serious
causes.
Abnormal results
Because abdominal ultrasound imaging is generally undertaken to confirm a suspected condition, the
results of a scan often will prove abnormal–that is they
will confirm the diagnosis, be it kidney stones, cirrhosis of the liver or an aortic aneurysm. At that point,
appropriate medical treatment as prescribed by a
patient’s doctor is in order. See the relevant disease
and disorder entries in this encyclopedia for more
information.