Definition
Partial birth abortion is a method of late-term
(after 20 weeks) abortion that terminates a pregnancy
and results in the death and intact removal of a fetus.
This procedure is most commonly referred to as intact
dilatation and extraction (D & X). It occurs in a rare
percentage of pregnancies.
Purpose
Partial birth abortion, or D&X, is performed to
end a pregnancy and results in the death of a fetus,
typically in the late second or third trimester.
Although D&X is highly controversial, some physi￾cians argue that it has advantages that make it a pre￾ferable procedure in some circumstances. One
perceived advantage is that the fetus is removed
largely intact, allowing for better evaluation and
autopsy of the fetus in cases of known fetal abnormal￾ities. Intact removal of the fetus also may carry a lower
risk of puncturing the uterus or damaging the cervix.
Another perceived advantage is that D&X ends the
pregnancy without requiring the woman to go
through labor, which may be less emotionally trau￾matic than other methods of late-term abortion. In
Hernia—Movement of a structure into a place it
does not belong.
Umbilical—Referring to the opening in the abdom￾inal wall where the blood vessels from the placentaenter.
Viscera—Any of the body’s organs located in the
chest or abdomen.
6 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE
Abortion, partial birth
addition, D&X may offer a lower cost and shorter
procedure time.
Precautions
Women considering D&X should be aware of the
highly controversial nature of this procedure. A controversy common to all late-term abortions is whether
the fetus is viable, or able to survive outside of the
woman’s body. A specific area of controversy with
D&X is that fetal death does not occur until after
most of the fetal body has exited the uterus. Several
states have taken legal action to limit or ban D&X and
many physicians who perform abortions do not perform D&X. This may restrict the availability of this
procedure to women seeking late-term abortions.
In March 2003, the United States Senate passed a
bill banning partial birth abortions and implementing
fines or maximum two-year jail terms for physicians
who perform them. In June 2003, the House approved
a ban as well. President George W. Bush signed the
legislation into law, but a federal judge declared the
law unconstitutional, so that the government had not
been able to enforce it. One of the opponents’ claims
was the legislation did not provide for exceptions for
cases in which the procedure was needed to protect the
mother’s health.
Description
Intact D&X, or partial birth abortion first
involves administration of medications to cause the
cervix to dilate, usually over the course of several
days. Next, the physician rotates the fetus to a footling
breech position. The body of the fetus is then drawn
out of the uterus feet first, until only the head remains
inside the uterus. Then, the physician uses an instrument to puncture the base of the skull, which collapses
the fetal head. Typically, the contents of the fetal head
are then partially suctioned out, which results in the
death of the fetus and reduces the size of the fetal head
enough to allow it to pass through the cervix. The dead
and otherwise intact fetus is then removed from the
woman’s body.
Preparation
Medical preparation for D&X involves an outpatient visit to administer medications, such as laminaria, to cause the cervix to begin dilating.
In addition, preparation may involve fulfilling
local legal requirements, such as a mandatory waiting
period, counseling, or an informed consent procedure
reviewing stages of fetal development, childbirth, alternative abortion methods, and adoption.
Aftercare
D&X typically does not require an overnight hospital stay, so a follow up appointment may be scheduled to monitor the woman for any complications.
Risks
With all abortion, the later in pregnancy an abortion is performed, the more complicated the procedure
and the greater the risk of injury to the woman. In
addition to associated emotional reactions, D&X carries the risk of injury to the woman, including heavy
bleeding, blood clots, damage to the cervix or uterus,
pelvic infection, and anesthesia-related complications.
There also is a risk of incomplete abortion, meaning
that the fetus is not dead when removed from the
woman’s body. Possible long-term risks include difficulty becoming pregnant or carrying a future pregnancy to term.
Normal results
The expected outcome of D&X is the termination
of a pregnancy with removal of a dead fetus from the
woman’s body.