Definition
Therapeutic abortion is the intentional termination of a pregnancy before the fetus can live independently. Abortion has been a legal procedure in the
United States since 1973.
Purpose
An abortion may be performed whenever there is
some compelling reason to end a pregnancy. Women
have abortions because continuing the pregnancy
would cause them hardship, endanger their life or
health, or because prenatal testing has shown that
the fetus will be born with severe abnormalities.
Abortions are safest when performed within the
first six to 10 weeks after the last menstrual period.
The calculation of this date is referred to as the
gestational age and is used in determining the stage
of pregnancy. For example, a woman who is two
weeks late having her period is said to be six weeks
pregnant, because it is six weeks since she last
menstruated.
About 90% of women who have abortions do so
before 13 weeks and experience few complications.
Abortions performed between 13-24 weeks have a
higher rate of complications. Abortions after 24
weeks are extremely rare and are usually limited to
situations where the life of the mother is in danger.
Precautions
Most women are able to have abortions at clinics
or outpatient facilities if the procedure is performed
early in pregnancy. Women who have stable diabetes,
controlled epilepsy, mild to moderate high blood pressure, or who are HIV positive can often have abortions
as outpatients if precautions are taken. Women with
heart disease, previous endocarditis, asthma,
lupuserythematosus, uterine fibroid tumors, blood clotting
disorders, poorly controlled epilepsy, or some psychological disorders usually need to be hospitalized in
order to receive special monitoring and medications
during the procedure.
Description
Very early abortions
Between five and seven weeks, a pregnancy can be
ended by a procedure called menstrual extraction.
This procedure is also sometimes called menstrual
regulation, mini-suction, or preemptive abortion.
The contents of the uterus are suctioned out through
a thin (3-4 mm) plastic tube that is inserted through the
undilated cervix. Suction is applied either by a bulb
syringe or a small pump.
Another method is called the morning after pill,
or emergency contraception. Basically, it involves taking high doses of birth control pills within 24 to 48
hours of having unprotected sex. The high doses of
hormones causes the uterine lining to change so that it
will not support a pregnancy. Thus, if the egg has been
fertilized, it is simply expelled from the body.
There are two types of emergency contraception.
One type is identical to ordinary birth control pills,
and uses the hormones estrogen and progestin. This
type is available with a prescription under the brand
name Preven. But women can even use their regular
birth control pills for emergency contraception, after
they check with their doctor about the proper dose.
About half of women who use birth control pills for
vomit.Thismethodcuts the riskof pregnancy 75percent.
The other type of morning-after pill contains only
one hormone: progestin, and is available under the
brand name Plan B. It is more effective than the first
type with a lower risk of nausea and vomiting. It
reduces the risk of pregnancy 89 percent.
Women should check with their physicians
regarding the proper dose of pills to take, as it depends
on the brand of birth control pill. Not all birth control
pills will work for emergency contraception.
Menstrual extractions are safe, but because the
amount of fetal material is so small at this stage of
development, it is easy to miss. This results in an incomplete abortion that means the pregnancy continues.
First trimester abortions
The first trimester of pregnancy includes the first
13 weeks after the last menstrual period. In the United
States, about 90% of abortions are performed during
this period. It is the safest time in which to have an
abortion, and the time in which women have the most
choice of how the procedure is performed.
MEDICAL ABORTIONS. Medical abortions are
brought about by taking medications that end the
pregnancy. The advantages of a first trimester medical
abortion are:
The procedure is non-invasive; no surgical instruments are used.

Anesthesia is not required.

Drugs are administered either orally or by injection.

The procedure resembles a natural miscarriage.
Disadvantages of a medical abortion are:

The effectiveness decreases after the seventh week.

The proceduremay requiremultiple visits to the doctor.

Bleeding after the abortion lasts longer than after a
surgical abortion.

The woman may see the contents of her womb as it is
expelled.
Two different medications can be used to bring
about an abortion. Methotrexate (Rheumatrex) works
by stopping fetal cells from dividing which causes the
fetus to die.
On the first visit to the doctor, the woman receives
an injection of methotrexate. On the second visit,
about a week later, she is given misoprostol
(Cytotec), an oxygenated unsaturated cyclic fatty
acid responsible for various hormonal reactions such
as muscle contraction (prostaglandin), that stimulates
contractions of the uterus. Within two weeks, the
woman will expel the contents of her uterus, ending
the pregnancy. A follow-up visit to the doctor is necessary to assure that the abortion is complete.
With this procedure, a woman will feel cramping
and may feel nauseated from the misoprostol. This
combination of drugs is 90-96% effective in ending
pregnancy.
Mifepristone (RU-486), which goes by the brand
name Mifeprex, works by blocking the action of progesterone, a hormone needed for pregnancy to continue, then stimulates ulerine contractions thus ending
the pregnancy. It can be taken as much as 49 days after
the first day of a woman’s last period. On the first visit
to the doctor, a woman takes a mifepristone pill. Two
days later she returns and, if the miscarriage has not
occurred, takes two misoprostol pills, which causes the
uterus to contract. Five percent of women won’t need
to take misoprostol. After an observation period, she
returns home.
Within four days, 90% of women have expelled
the contents of their uterus and completed the abortion. Within 14 days, 95-97% of women have completed the abortion. A third follow-up visit to the
doctor is necessary to confirm through observation
or ultrasound that the procedure is complete. In the
event that it is not, a surgical abortion is performed.
Studies show that 4.5 to 8 percent of women need
surgery or a blood transfusion after taking mifepristone, and the pregnancy persists in about 1 percent of
women. In this case, surgical abortion is recommended because the fetus may be damanged. Side
effects include nausea, vaginal bleeding and heavy
cramping. The bleeding is typically heavier than a
normal period and may last up to 16 days.
Mifepristone is not recommended for women with
ectopic pregnancy, an IUD, who have been taking
long-term steroidal therapy, have bleeding abnormalities or on blood-thinners such as Coumadin.
Surgical abortions
First trimester surgical abortions are performed
using vacuum aspiration. The procedure is also called
dilation and evacuation (D & E), suction dilation,
vacuum curettage, or suction curettage.
Advantages of a vacuum aspiration abortion are:

It is usually done as a one-day outpatient procedure.

The procedure takes only 10-15 minutes.

Bleeding after the abortion lasts five days or less.

The woman does not see the products of her womb
being removed.
Disadvantages include:

The procedure is invasive; surgical instruments are
used.

Infection may occur.
During a vacuum aspiration, the woman’s cervix
is gradually dilated by expanding rods inserted into
the cervical opening. Once dilated, a tube attached to a
suction pump is inserted through the cervix and the
contents of the uterus are suctioned out. The procedure is 97-99% effective. The amount of discomfort a
woman feels varies considerably. Local anesthesia is
often given to numb the cervix, but it does not mask
uterine cramping. After a few hours of rest, the woman
may return home.
Second trimester abortions
Although it is better to have an abortion during
the first trimester, some second trimester abortions
may be inevitable. The results of genetic testing are
often not available until 16 weeks. In addition,
women, especially teens, may not have recognized
the pregnancy or come to terms with it emotionally
soon enough to have a first trimester abortion. Teens
make up the largest group having second trimester
abortions.
a D & E. The procedures are similar to those used
in the first trimester, but a larger suction tube must be
used because more material must be removed. This
increases the amount of cervical dilation necessary and
increases the risk of the procedure. Many physicians are
reluctant to perform a D & E this late in pregnancy, and
for some women is it not a medically safe option.
The alternative to a D & E in the second trimester
is an abortion by induced labor. Induced labor may
require an overnight stay in a hospital. The day before
the procedure, the woman visits the doctor for tests,
and to either have rods inserted in her cervix to help
dilate it or to receive medication that will soften the
cervix and speed up labor.
On the day of the abortion, drugs, usually prostaglandins to induce contractions, and a salt water
solution, are injected into the uterus. Contractions
begin, and within eight to 72 hours the woman delivers
the fetus.
Side effects of this procedure include nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea from the prostaglandins, and pain
from uterine cramps. Anesthesia of the sort used in
childbirth can be given to mask the pain. Many women
are able to go home a few hours after the procedure.
Very early abortions cost between $200-$400.
Later abortions cost more. The cost increases about
$100 per week between the thirteenth and sixteenth
week. Second trimester abortions are much more
costly because they often involve more risk, more
services, anesthesia, and sometimes a hospital stay.
Insurance carriers and HMOs may or may not cover
the procedure. Federal law prohibits federal funds
including Medicaid funds, from being used to pay for
an elective abortion.
Preparation
The doctor must know accurately the stage of a
woman’s pregnancy before an abortion is performed.
The doctor will ask the woman questions about her
menstrual cycle and also do a physical examination to
confirm the stage of pregnancy. This may be done at
an office visit before the abortion or on the day of the
abortion. Some states require a waiting period before
an abortion can be performed. Others require parental
or court consent for a child under age 18 to receive an
abortion.
Despite the fact that almost half of all women
in the United States have had at least one abortion
by the time they reach age 45, abortion is surrounded
by controversy. Women often find themselves in
emotional turmoil when deciding if an abortion is
a procedure they wish to undergo. Pre-abortion counseling is important in helping a woman resolve any
questions she may have about having the procedure.
Aftercare
Regardless of the method used to perform the
abortion, a woman will be observed for a period of
time to make sure her blood pressure is stable and
that bleeding is controlled. The doctor may prescribe
antibiotics to reduce the chance of infection. Women
who are Rh negative (lacking genetically determined
antigens in their red blood cells that produce immune
responses) should be given a human Rh immune
globulin (RhoGAM) after the procedure unless the
father of the fetus is also Rh negative. This prevents
blood incompatibility complications in future
pregnancies.
Bleeding will continue for about five days in a
surgical abortion and longer in a medical abortion.
To decrease the risk of infection, a woman should
avoid intercourse and not use tampons and douches
for two weeks after the abortion.
A follow-up visit is a necessary part of the
woman’s aftercare. Contraception will be offered to
women who wish to avoid future pregnancies, because
menstrual periods normally resume within a few
weeks.
Risks
Serious complications resulting from abortions
performed before 13 weeks are rare. Of the 90% of
women who have abortions in this time period, 2.5%
have minor complications that can be handled without
hospitalization. Less than 0.5% have complications
that require a hospital stay. The rate of complications
increases as the pregnancy progresses.
Complications from abortions can include:

uncontrolled bleeding

infection

blood clots accumulating in the uterus

a tear in the cervix or uterus

missed abortion where the pregnancy continues

incomplete abortion where some material from the
pregnancy remains in the uterus
Women who experience any of the following
symptoms of post-abortion complications should call
the clinic or doctor who performed the abortion
immediately
severe pain

fever over 100.4 8F (38.2 8C)

heavy bleeding that soaks through more than one
sanitary pad per hour

foul-smelling discharge from the vagina

continuing symptoms of pregnancy
Normal results
Usually the pregnancy is ended without complication and without altering future fertility.