Selective abortion, also known as selective reduction, refers to choosing to abort a fetus, typically in a
multi-fetal pregnancy, to decrease the health risks to
the mother in carrying and giving birth to more than
one or two babies, and also to decrease the risk of
complications to the remaining fetus(es). The term
selective abortion also refers to choosing to abort a
fetus for reasons such as the woman is carrying a fetus
which likely will be born with some birth defect or
impairment, or because the sex of the fetus is not
preferred by the individual.
Purpose
A woman may decide to abort for health reasons,
for example, she is at higher risk for complications
during pregnancy because of a disorder or disease
such as diabetes. A 2004 case reported on an embryo
embedded in a cesarean section scar. Although rare, it
can be life threatening to the mother. In this care,
selective abortion was successful at saving the mother
and the remaining embryos.
However, selective reduction is recommended
often in cases of multi-fetal pregnancy, or the presence
of more than one fetus, typically, at least three or more
fetuses. In the general population, multi-fetal pregnancy happens in only about 1-2% of pregnant
women. But multi-fetal pregnancies occur far more
often in women using fertility drugs.
Precautions
Because women or couples who use fertility drugs
have made an extra effort to become pregnant, it is
possible that the individuals may be unwilling or
uncomfortable with the decision to abort a fetus in
cases of multi-fetal pregnancy. Individuals engaging in
fertility treatment should be made aware of the risk of
multi-fetal pregnancy and consider the prospect of
recommended reduction before undergoing fertility
treatment.
Description
Selective reduction is usually performed between
nine and 12 weeks of pregnancy and is most successful
when performed in early pregnancy. It is a simple
procedure and can be performed on an outpatient
basis. A needle is inserted into the woman’s stomach
or vagina and potassium chloride is injected into the
fetus.
Preparation
Individuals who have chosen selective reduction
to safeguard the remaining fetuses should be coun￾seled prior to the procedure. Individuals should
receive information regarding the risks of a multi￾fetal pregnancy to both the fetuses and the mother
compared with the risks after the reduction.
Individuals seeking an abortion for any reason
should consider the ethical implications whether it be
because the fetus is not the preferred sex or because the
fetus would be born with a severe birth defect.
Aftercare
Counseling should continue after the abortion
because it is a traumatic event. Individuals may feel
guilty about choosing one fetus over another. Mental
health professionals should be consulted throughout
the process.
Risks
About 75% of women who undergo selective
reduction will go into premature labor. About 4-5%
of women undergoing selective reduction also

Multi-fetal pregnancy—A pregnancy of two or
more fetuses.
Selective reduction—Typically referred to in cases
of multifetal pregnancy, when one or more fetuses
are aborted to preserve the viability of the remain￾ing fetuses and decrease health risks to the mother.
8 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE
Abortion, selective
miscarry one or more of the remaining fetuses. The
risks associated with multi-fetal pregnancy are considered higher.
Normal results
In cases where a multi-fetal pregnancy of three or
more fetuses is reduced to two fetuses, the remaining
twin fetuses typically develop as they would if they had
been conceived as twins.