Definition
An infected skin nodule that contains pus may
need to be drained via a cut if it does not respond to
antibiotics. This allows the pus to escape, and the
infection to heal.
Purpose
An abscess is a pus-filled sore, usually caused by a
bacterial infection. The pus is made up of both live and
dead organisms and destroyed tissue from the white
blood cells that were carried to the area to fight the
infection. Abscesses are often found in the soft tissue
under the skin, such as the armpit or the groin.
However, they may develop in any organ, and are
commonly found in the breast and gums. Abscesses
are far more serious and call for more specific treatment if they are located in deep organs such as the
lung, liver or brain.
Because the lining of the abscess cavity tends
to interfere with the amount of the drug that can
penetrate the source of infection from the blood, the
cavity itself may require draining. Once an abscess has
fully formed, it often does not respond to antibiotics.
Even if the antibiotic does penetrate into the abscess, it
doesn’t function as well in that environment.
Precautions
An abscess can usually be diagnosed visually,
although an imaging technique such as a computed
tomography scan may be used to confirm the extent of
the abscess before drainage. Such procedures may also
be needed to localize internal abscesses, such as those
in the abdominal cavity or brain.
Description
A doctor will cut into the lining of the abscess,
allowing the pus to escape either through a drainage
tube or by leaving the cavity open to the skin. How big
the incision is depends on how quickly the pus is
encountered.
Once the abscess is opened, the doctor will clean
and irrigate the wound thoroughly with saline. If it is
not too large or deep, the doctor may simply pack the
abscess wound with gauze for 24–48 hours to absorb
the pus and discharge.
If it is a deeper abscess, the doctor may insert a
drainage tube after cleaning out the wound. Once the
tube is in place, the surgeon closes the incision with
simple stitches, and applies a sterile dressing. Drainage
is maintained for several days to help prevent the
abscess from reforming.
Preparation
The skin over the abscess will be cleansed by
swabbing gently with an antiseptic solution.
Aftercare
Much of the pain around the abscess will be gone
after the surgery. Healing is usually very fast. After the
tube is taken out, antibiotics may be continued for
several days. Applying heat and keeping the affected
area elevated may help relieve inflammation.
Risks
If there is any scarring, it is likely to become much
less noticeable as time goes on, and eventually almost
invisible. Occasionally, an abscess within a vital organ
(such as the brain) damages enough surrounding tissue
that there is some permanent loss of normal function.
Normal results
Most abscesses heal after drainage alone; others
require drainage and antibiotic drug treatment.