An abscess is an enclosed collection of liquefied
tissue, known as pus, somewhere in the body. It is the
result of the body’s defensive reaction to foreign
material.
Description
There are two types of abscesses, septic and sterile.
Most abscesses are septic, which means that they are
the result of an infection. Septic abscesses can occur
anywhere in the body. Only a germ and the body’s
immune response are required. In response to the
invading germ, white blood cells gather at the infected
site and begin producing chemicals called enzymes
that attack the germ by digesting it. These enzymes
act like acid, killing the germs and breaking them
down into small pieces that can be picked up by
the circulation and eliminated from the body.
Unfortunately, these chemicals also digest body tissues. In most cases, the germ produces similar chemicals. The result is a thick, yellow liquid–pus–
containing digested germs, digested tissue, white
blood cells, and enzymes.
An abscess is the last stage of a tissue infection
that begins with a process called inflammation.
Initially, as the invading germ activates the body’s
immune system, several events occur:

Blood flow to the area increases.

The temperature of the area increases due to the
increased blood supply.

The area swells due to the accumulation of water,
blood, and other liquids.

It turns red.

It hurts, because of the irritation from the swelling
and the chemical activity.
These four signs–heat, swelling, redness, and
pain–characterize inflammation.
As the process progresses, the tissue begins to turn
to liquid, and an abscess forms. It is the nature of an
abscess to spread as the chemical digestion liquefies
more and more tissue. Furthermore, the spreading
follows the path of least resistance–the tissues most
easily digested. A good example is an abscess just
beneath the skin. It most easily continues along
beneath the skin rather than working its way through
the skin where it could drain its toxic contents. The
contents of the abscess also leak into the general circulation and produce symptoms just like any other
infection. These include chills, fever, aching, and
general discomfort.
Sterile abscesses are sometimes a milder form
of the same process caused not by germs but by nonliving irritants such as drugs. If an injected drug
like penicillin is not absorbed, it stays where it wasinjected and may cause enough irritation to generate
a sterile abscess–sterile because there is no infection
involved. Sterile abscesses are quite likely to turn into
hard, solid lumps as they scar, rather than remaining
pockets of pus.
Causes and symptoms
Many different agents cause abscesses. The most
common are the pus-forming (pyogenic) bacteria like
Staphylococcus aureus, which is nearly always the
cause of abscesses under the skin. Abscesses near
the large bowel, particularly around the anus, may
be caused by any of the numerous bacteria found
within the large bowel. Brain abscesses and liver
abscesses can be caused by any organism that can
travel there through the circulation. Bacteria,
amoeba, and certain fungi can travel in this fashion.
Abscesses in other parts of the body are caused by
organisms that normally inhabit nearby structures or
that infect them. Some common causes of specific
abscesses are:

skin abscesses by normal skin flora

dental and throat abscesses by mouth flora

lung abscesses by normal airway flora, pneumonia
germs, or tuberculosis

abdominal and anal abscesses by normal bowel
flora
Specific types of abscesses
Listed below are some of the more common and
important abscesses.

Carbuncles and other boils. Skin oil glands (sebaceous glands) on the back or the back of the neck
are the ones usually infected. The most common
germ involved is Staphylococcus aureus. Acne is a
similar condition of sebaceous glands on the face
and back.

Pilonidal abscess. Many people have as a birth defect
a tiny opening in the skin just above the anus. Fecal
bacteria can enter this opening, causing an infection
and subsequent abscess.

Retropharyngeal, parapharyngeal, peritonsillar
abscess. As a result of throat infections like strep
throat and tonsillitis, bacteria can invade the deeper
tissues of the throat and cause an abscess. These
abscesses can compromise swallowing and even
breathing.

Lung abscess. During or after pneumonia, whether
it’s due to bacteria [common pneumonia], tuberculosis, fungi, parasites, or other germs, abscesses can
develop as a complication.

Liver abscess. Bacteria or amoeba from the intestines
can spread through the blood to the liver and cause
abscesses.

Psoas abscess. Deep in the back of the abdomen on
either side of the lumbar spine lie the psoas muscles.
They flex the hips. An abscess can develop in one of
these muscles, usually when it spreads from the
appendix, the large bowel, or the fallopian tubes.
Diagnosis
The common findings of inflammation–heat, redness, swelling, and pain–easily identify superficial
abscesses. Abscesses in other places may produce
only generalized symptoms such as fever and discomfort. If the patient’s symptoms and physical examination do not help, a physician may have to resort to a
battery of tests to locate the site of an abscess, but
usually something in the initial evaluation directs the
search. Recent or chronic disease in an organ suggests
it may be the site of an abscess. Dysfunction of an
organ or system–for instance, seizures or altered bowel
function–may provide the clue. Pain and tenderness
on physical examination are common findings.
Sometimes a deep abscess will eat a small channel
(sinus) to the surface and begin leaking pus. A sterile
abscess may cause only a painful lump deep in the
buttock where a shot was given.Treatment
Since skin is very resistant to the spread of infection, it acts as a barrier, often keeping the toxic
chemicals of an abscess from escaping the body on
their own. Thus, the pus must be drained from the
abscess by a physician. The surgeon determines when
the abscess is ready for drainage and opens a path to
the outside, allowing the pus to escape. Ordinarily, the
body handles the remaining infection, sometimes with
the help of antibiotics or other drugs. The surgeon may
leave a drain (a piece of cloth or rubber) in the abscess
cavity to prevent it from closing before all the pus has
drained out.
Alternative treatment
If an abscess is directly beneath the skin, it will be
slowly working its way through the skin as it is more
rapidly working its way elsewhere. Since chemicals
work faster at higher temperatures, applications of
hot compresses to the skin over the abscess will hasten
the digestion of the skin and eventually result in its
breaking down, releasing the pus spontaneously. This
treatment is best reserved for smaller abscesses in relatively less dangerous areas of the body–limbs, trunk,
back of the neck. It is also useful for all superficial
abscesses in their very early stages. It will ‘‘ripen’’
them.
Contrast hydrotherapy, alternating hot and
cold compresses, can also help assist the body in
resorption of the abscess. There are two homeopathic remedies that work to rebalance the body in
relation to abscess formation, Silica and Hepar
sulphuris. In cases of septic abscesses, bentonite
clay packs (bentonite clay and a small amount of
Hydrastis powder) can be used to draw the infection
from the area.
Prognosis
Once the abscess is properly drained, the prognosis is excellent for the condition itself. The reason
for the abscess (other diseases the patient has) will
determine the overall outcome. If, on the other
hand, the abscess ruptures into neighboring areas or
permits the infectious agent to spill into the bloodstream, serious or fatal consequences are likely.
Abscesses in and around the nasal sinuses, face, ears,
and scalp may work their way into the brain.
Abscesses within an abdominal organ such as the
liver may rupture into the abdominal cavity. In either
case, the result is life threatening. Blood poisoning is a
term commonly used to describe an infection that has
spilled into the blood stream and spread throughout
the body from a localized origin. Blood poisoning,
known to physicians as septicemia, is also life
threatening.
Of special note, abscesses in the hand are more
serious than they might appear. Due to the intricate
structure and the overriding importance of the hand,
any hand infection must be treated promptly and
competently.
Prevention
Infections that are treated early with heat (if
superficial) or antibiotics will often resolve without
the formation of an abscess. It is even better to avoid
infections altogether by taking prompt care of open
injuries, particularly puncture wounds. Bites are the
most dangerous of all, even more so because they
often occur on the hand.