Achalasia is a disorder of the esophagus that
prevents normal swallowing.
Description
Achalasia affects the esophagus, the tube that
carries swallowed food from the back of the throat
down into the stomach. A ring of muscle called the
lower esophageal sphincter encircles the esophagus
just above the entrance to the stomach. This sphincter
muscle is normally contracted to close the esophagus.
When the sphincter is closed, the contents of the stomach cannot flow back into the esophagus. Backward
flow of stomach contents (reflux) can irritate and
inflame the esophagus, causing symptoms such as
heartburn. The act of swallowing causes a wave of
esophageal contraction called peristalsis. Peristalsis
pushes food along the esophagus. Normally, peristalsis causes the esophageal sphincter to relax and allow
food into the stomach. In achalasia, which means
‘‘failure to relax,’’ the esophageal sphincter remains
contracted. Normal peristalsis is interrupted and food
cannot enter the stomach.
Causes and symptoms
Causes
Achalasia is caused by degeneration of the nerve
cells that normally signal the brain to relax the
esophageal sphincter. The ultimate cause of this
degeneration is unknown. Autoimmune disease or
hidden infection is suspected.
Symptoms
Dysphagia, or difficulty swallowing, is the most
common symptom of achalasia. The person with
achalasia usually has trouble swallowing both liquid
and solid foods, often feeling that food ‘‘gets stuck’’
on the way down. The person has chest pain that
is often mistaken for angina pectoris (cardiac pain).
Heartburn and difficulty belching are common.
Symptoms usually get steadily worse. Other symptoms
may include nighttime cough or recurrent pneumonia
caused by food passing into the lower airways.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of achalasia begins with a careful medical history. The history should focus on the timing of
symptoms and on eliminating other medical conditions that may cause similar symptoms. Tests used to
diagnose achalasia include:

Esophageal manometry. In this test, a thin tube is
passed into the esophagus to measure the pressure
exerted by the esophageal sphincter.

X ray of the esophagus. Barium may be swallowed to
act as a contrast agent. Barium reveals the outlines of
the esophagus in greater detail and makes it easier to
see its constriction at the sphincter.

Endoscopy. In this test, a tube containing a lens and a
light source is passed into the esophagus. Endoscopy is
used to look directly at the surface of the esophagus.
This test can also detect tumors that cause symptoms
like those of achalasia. Cancer of the esophagus occurs
as a complication of achalasia in 2-7% of patients.
Treatment
The first-line treatment for achalasia is balloon
dilation. In this procedure, an inflatable membrane
or balloon is passed down the esophagus to the sphincter and inflated to force the sphincter open. Dilation is
effective in about 70% of patients.
Three other treatments are used for achalasia when
balloon dilation is inappropriate or unacceptable.
Botulinum toxin injection. Injected into the sphincter, botulinum toxin paralyzes the muscle and allows
it to relax. Symptoms usually return within one to
two years.

Esophagomyotomy. This surgical procedure cuts the
sphincter muscle to allow the esophagus to open.
Esophagomyotomy is becoming more popular with
the development of techniques allowing very small
abdominal incisions.

Drug therapy. Nifedipine, a calcium-channel blocker,
reduces muscle contraction. Taken daily, this drug
provides relief for about two-thirds of patients for as
long as two years.
Prognosis
Most patients with achalasia can be treated effectively. Achalasia does not reduce life expectancy
unless esophageal carcinoma develops.
Prevention
There is no known way to prevent achalasia.