Definition
Acne is a common skin disease characterized by
pimples on the face, chest, and back. It occurs when
the pores of the skin become clogged with oil, dead
skin cells, and bacteria.
Description
Acne vulgaris, the medical term for common acne,
is the most common skin disease. It affects nearly 17
million people in the United States. While acne can
arise at any age, it usually begins at puberty and worsens during adolescence. Nearly 85% of people
develop acne at some time between the ages of 12-25
years. Up to 20% of women develop mild acne. It is
also found in some newborns.
The sebaceous glands lie just beneath the skin’s
surface. They produce an oil called sebum, the skin’s
natural moisturizer. These glands and the hair follicles
within which they are found are called sebaceous
follicles. These follicles open onto the skin through
pores. At puberty, increased levels of androgens
(male hormones) cause the glands to produce too
much sebum. When excess sebum combines with
dead, sticky skin cells, a hard plug, or comedo, forms
that blocks the pore. Mild noninflammatory acne consists of the two types of comedones, whiteheads and
blackheads.
Moderate and severe inflammatory types of acne
result after the plugged follicle is invaded by
Propionibacterium acnes, a bacteria that normally
lives on the skin. A pimple forms when the damaged
follicle weakens and bursts open, releasing sebum,
bacteria, and skin and white blood cells into the surrounding tissues. Inflamed pimples near the skin’s surface are called papules; when deeper, they are called
pustules. The most severe type of acne consists of cysts
(closed sacs) and nodules (hard swellings). Scarring
occurs when new skin cells are laid down to replace
damaged cells.
The most common sites of acne are the face, chest,
shoulders, and back since these are the parts of the
body where the most sebaceous follicles are found.
Causes and symptoms
The exact cause of acne is unknown. Several risk
factors have been identified:

Age. Due to the hormonal changes they experience,
teenagers are more likely to develop acne.

Gender. Boys have more severe acne and develop it
more often than girls.

Disease. Hormonal disorders can complicate acne in
girls.

Heredity. Individuals with a family history of acne
have greater susceptibility to the disease.

Hormonal changes. Acne can flare up before menstruation, during pregnancy, and menopause.
Diet. No foods cause acne, but certain foods may
cause flare-ups.

Drugs. Acne can be a side effect of drugs including
tranquilizers, antidepressants, antibiotics, oral contraceptives, and anabolic steroids.

Personal hygiene. Abrasive soaps, hard scrubbing, or
picking at pimples will make them worse.

Cosmetics. Oil-based makeup and hair sprays worsen acne.

Environment. Exposure to oils and greases, polluted
air, and sweating in hot weather aggravate acne.

Stress. Emotional stress may contribute to acne.
Acne is usually not conspicuous, although inflamed lesions may cause pain, tenderness, itching, or
swelling. The most troubling aspects of these lesions
are the negative cosmetic effects and potential for
scarring. Some people, especially teenagers, become
emotionally upset about their condition, and have
problems forming relationships or keeping jobs.
Diagnosis
Acne patients are often treated by family doctors.
Complicated cases are referred to a dermatologist, a
skin disease specialist, or an endocrinologist, a specialist who treats diseases of the body’s endocrine (hormones and glands) system.
Acne has a characteristic appearance and is not
difficult to diagnose. The doctor takes a complete
medical history, including questions about skin care,
diet, factors causing flare-ups, medication use, and
prior treatment. Physical examination includes the
face, upper neck, chest, shoulders, back, and other
affected areas. Under good lighting, the doctor determines what types and how many blemishes are present, whether they are inflamed, whether they are deep
or superficial, and whether there is scarring or skin
discoloration.
KEY TERMS
Androgens—Male sex hormones that are linked
with the development of acne.
Antiandrogens—Drugs that inhibit the production
of androgens.
Antibiotics—Medicines that kill bacteria.
Comedo—A hard plug composed of sebum and
dead skin cells. The mildest type of acne.
Comedolytic—Drugs that break up comedones
and open clogged pores.
Corticosteroids—A group of hormones produced
by the adrenal glands with different functions,
including regulation of fluid balance, androgen
activity, and reaction to inflammation.
Estrogens—Hormones produced by the ovaries,
the female sex glands.
Isotretinoin—A drug that decreases sebum production and dries up acne pimples.
Sebaceous follicles—A structure found within the
skin that houses the oil-producing glands and hair
follicles, where pimples form.
Sebum—An oily skin moisturizer produced by
sebaceous glands.
Tretinoin—A drug that works by increasing the
turnover (death and replacement) of skin cells.
Acne vulgaris affecting a woman’s face. Acne is the general
name given to a skin disorder in which the sebaceous glands
become inflamed. (Photograph by Biophoto Associates, Photo
Researchers, Inc. Reproduced by permission.)
In teenagers, acne is often found on the forehead,
nose, and chin. As people get older, acne tends to
appear towards the outer part of the face. Adult
women may have acne on their chins and around
their mouths. The elderly may develop whiteheads
and blackheads on the upper cheeks and skin around
the eyes.
Laboratory tests are not done unless the patient
appears to have a hormonal disorder or other medical
problem. In this case, blood analyses or other tests
may be ordered. Most insurance plans cover the
costs of diagnosing and treating acne.
Treatment
Acne treatment consists of reducing sebum production, removing dead skin cells, and killing bacteria
with topical drugs and oral medications. Treatment
choice depends upon whether the acne is mild, moderate, or severe.
Drugs
TOPICAL DRUGS. Treatment for mild noninflammatory acne consists of reducing the formation of new
comedones with topical tretinoin, benzoyl peroxide,
adapalene, or salicylic acid. Tretinoin is especially
effective because it increases turnover (death and
replacement) of skin cells. When complicated by
inflammation, topical antibiotics may be added to the
treatment regimen. Improvement is usually seen in
two to four weeks.
Topical medications are available as cream, gel,
lotion, or pad preparations of varying strengths.
They include antibiotics (agents that kill bacteria),
such as erythromycin, clindamycin (Cleocin-T), and
meclocycline (Meclan); comedolytics (agents that
loosen hard plugs and open pores) such as the vitamin
A acid tretinoin (Retin-A), salicylic acid, adapalene
(Differin), resorcinol, and sulfur. Drugs that act as
both comedolytics and antibiotics, such as benzoyl
peroxide, azelaic acid (Azelex), or benzoyl peroxide
plus erythromycin (Benzamycin), are also used.
These drugs may be used for months to years to
achieve disease control.
After washing with mild soap, the drugs are
applied alone or in combination, once or twice a day
over the entire affected area of skin. Possible side
effects include mild redness, peeling, irritation, dryness, and an increased sensitivity to sunlight that
requires use of a sunscreen.
ORAL DRUGS. Oral antibiotics are taken daily for
two to four months. The drugs used include tetracycline,
erythromycin, minocycline (Minocin), doxycycline,
clindamycin (Cleocin), and trimethoprim- sulfamethoxazole (Bactrim, Septra). Possible side effects include
allergic reactions, stomach upset, vaginal yeast infections, dizziness, and tooth discoloration.
The goal of treating moderate acne is to decrease
inflammation and prevent new comedone formation.
One effective treatment is topical tretinoin along with
a topical or oral antibiotic. A combination of topical
benzoyl peroxide and erythromycin is also very effective. Improvement is normally seen within four to six
weeks, but treatment is maintained for at least two to
four months.
A drug reserved for the treatment of severe
acne, oral isotretinoin (Accutane), reduces sebum
production and cell stickiness. It is the treatment
of choice for severe acne with cysts and nodules,
and is used with or without topical or oral antibiotics. Taken for four to five months, it provides longterm disease control in up to 60% of patients. If the
acne reappears, another course of isotretinoin may
be needed by about 20% of patients, while another
20% may do well with topical drugs or oral antibiotics. Side effects include temporary worsening of
the acne, dry skin, nosebleeds, vision disorders, and
elevated liver enzymes, blood fats and cholesterol.
This drug must not be taken during pregnancy since
it causes birth defects.
Anti-androgens, drugs that inhibit androgen production, are used to treat women who are unresponsive to other therapies. Certain types of oral
contraceptives (for example, Ortho-Tri-Cyclen) and
female sex hormones (estrogens) reduce hormone
activity in the ovaries. Other drugs, for example, spironolactone and corticosteroids, reduce hormone
activity in the adrenal glands. Improvement may
take up to four months.
Oral corticosteroids, or anti-inflammatory drugs,
are the treatment of choice for an extremely severe,
but rare type of destructive inflammatory acne called
acne fulminans, found mostly in adolescent males.
Acne conglobata, a more common form of severe
inflammation, is characterized by numerous, deep,
inflammatory nodules that heal with scarring. It is
treated with oral isotretinoin and corticosteroids.
Other treatments
Several surgical or medical treatments are available to alleviate acne or the resulting scars:

Comedone extraction. The comedo is removed from
the pore with a special tool.
Chemical peels. Glycolic acid is applied to peel off
the top layer of skin to reduce scarring.

Dermabrasion. The affected skin is frozen with a
chemical spray, and removed by brushing or planing.

Punch grafting. Deep scars are excised and the area
repaired with small skin grafts.

Intralesional injection. Corticosteroids are injected
directly into inflamed pimples.

Collagen injection. Shallow scars are elevated by
collagen (protein) injections.
Alternative treatment
Alternative treatments for acne focus on proper
cleansing to keep the skin oil-free; eating a wellbalanced diet high in fiber, zinc, and raw foods; and
avoiding alcohol, dairy products, smoking, caffeine,
sugar, processed foods, and foods high in iodine,
such as salt. Supplementation with herbs such as
burdock root (Arctium lappa), red clover (Trifolium
pratense), and milk thistle (Silybum marianum), and
with nutrients such as essential fatty acids, vitamin B
complex, zinc, vitamin A, and chromium is also
recommended. Chinese herbal remedies used for
acne include cnidium seed (Cnidium monnieri) and
honeysuckle flower (Lonicera japonica). Wholistic
physicians or nutritionists can recommend the proper
amounts of these herbs.
Prognosis
Acne is not curable, although long-term control is
achieved in up to 60% of patients treated with isotretinoin. It can be controlled by proper treatment, with
improvement taking two or more months. Acne tends
to reappear when treatment stops, but spontaneously
improves over time. Inflammatory acne may leave
scars that require further treatment.
Prevention
There are no sure ways to prevent acne, but the
following steps may be taken to minimize flare-ups:

gentle washing of affected areas once or twice every
day

avoid abrasive cleansers

use noncomedogenic makeup and moisturizers

shampoo often and wear hair off face

eat a well-balanced diet, avoiding foods that trigger
flare-ups

unless told otherwise, give dry pimples a limited
amount of sun exposure

do not pick or squeeze blemishes

reduce stress