Definition
An acoustic neuroma is a benign tumor involving
cells of the myelin sheath that surrounds the vestibulocochlear nerve (eighth cranial nerve).
Description
The vestibulocochlear nerve extends from the
inner ear to the brain and is made up of a vestibular
branch, often called the vestibular nerve, and a
cochlear branch, called the cochlear nerve. The vestibular and cochlear nerves lie next to one another. They
also run along side other cranial nerves. People possess
two of each type of vestibulocochlear nerve, one that
extends from the left ear and one that extends from the
right ear.
The vestibular nerve transmits information concerning balance from the inner ear to the brain and the
cochlear nerve transmits information about hearing.
The vestibular nerve, like many nerves, is surrounded
by a cover called a myelin sheath. A tumor, called
a schwannoma, can sometimes develop from the cells
of the myelin sheath. A tumor is an abnormal growth
of tissue that results from the uncontrolled growth of
cells. Acoustic neuromas are often called vestibular
schwannomas because they are tumors that arise
nerve. Acoustic neuromas are considered benign
(non-cancerous) tumors since they do not spread
to other parts of the body. They can occur anywhere along the vestibular nerve but are most likely
to occur where the vestibulocochlear nerve passes
through the tiny bony canal that connects the brain
and the inner ear.
An acoustic neuroma can arise from the left
vestibular nerve or the right vestibular nerve. A unilateral tumor is a tumor arising from one nerve and
a bilateral tumor arises from both vestibular nerves.
Unilateral acoustic neuromas usually occur spontaneously (by chance). Bilateral acoustic neuromas
occur as part of a hereditary condition called
Neurofibromatosis Type 2 (NF2). A person with
NF2 has inherited a predisposition for developing acoustic neuromas and other tumors of the
nerve cells.
Acoustic neuromas usually grow slowly and
can take years to develop. Some acoustic neuromas
remain so small that they do not cause any symptoms. As the acoustic neuroma grows it can interfere with the functioning of the vestibular nerve
and can cause vertigo and balance difficulties. If
the acoustic nerve grows large enough to press
against the cochlear nerve, then hearing loss and
a ringing (tinnitus) in the affected ear will usually
occur. If untreated and the acoustic neuroma continues to grow it can press against other nerves in
the region and cause other symptoms. This tumor
can be life threatening if it becomes large enough
to press against and interfere with the functioning
of the brain.
Causes and symptoms
Causes
An acoustic neuroma is caused by a change or
absence of both of the NF2 tumor suppressor genes
in a nerve cell. Every person possesses a pair of NF2
genes in every cell of their body including their nerve
cells. One NF2 gene is inherited from the egg cell of the
mother and one NF2 gene is inherited from the sperm
cell of the father. The NF2 gene is responsible for
helping to prevent the formation of tumors in the
nerve cells. In particular the NF2 gene helps to prevent
acoustic neuromas.
Only one unchanged and functioning NF2 gene
is necessary to prevent the formation of an acoustic
neuroma. If both NF2 genes become changed or
missing in one of the myelin sheath cells of the
vestibular nerve then an acoustic neuroma will usually
develop. Most unilateral acoustic neuromas result
when the NF2 genes become spontaneously changed
or missing. Someone with a unilateral acoustic
neuroma that has developed spontaneously is not at
increased risk for having children with an acoustic
neuroma. Some unilateral acoustic neuromas result
from the hereditary condition NF2. It is also possible
that some unilateral acoustic neuromas may be caused
by changes in other genes responsible for preventing
the formation of tumors.
Bilateral acoustic neuromas result when someone is affected with the hereditary condition NF2.
A person with NF2 is typically born with one
unchanged and one changed or missing NF2 gene
in every cell of their body. Sometimes they inherit
this change from their mother or father. Sometimes
the change occurs spontaneously when the egg and
sperm come together to form the first cell of the
baby. The children of a person with NF2 have a
50% chance of inheriting the changed or missing
NF2 gene.
A person with NF2 will develop an acoustic neuroma if the remaining unchanged NF2 gene becomes
spontaneously changed or missing in one of the myelin
sheath cells of their vestibular nerve. People with NF2
often develop acoustic neuromas at a younger age.
The mean age of onset of acoustic neuroma in NF2
is 31 years of age versus 50 years of age for sporadic
acoustic neuromas. Not all people with NF2, however,
develop acoustic neuromas. People with NF2 are at
increased risk for developing cataracts and tumors in
other nerve cells.
Most people with a unilateral acoustic neuroma
are not affected with NF2. Some people with NF2,
however, only develop a tumor in one of the vestibulocochlear nerves. Others may initially be diagnosed
with a unilateral tumor but may develop a tumor in the
other nerve a number of years later. NF2 should be
considered in someone under the age of 40 who has a
unilateral acoustic neuroma. Someone with a unilateral acoustic neuroma and other family members
diagnosed with NF2 probably is affected with NF2.
Someone with a unilateral acoustic neuroma and
other symptoms of NF2 such as cataracts and other
tumors may also be affected with NF2. On the other
hand, someone over the age of 50 with a unilateral
acoustic neuroma, no other tumors and no family
history of NF2 is very unlikely to be affected
with NF2.
Recent studies in Europe have suggested a possible connection between the widespread use of mobile
phones and an increased risk of developing acoustic
neuromas. Some observers, however, question
whether mobile phones have been in use long enough
to be an identifiable risk factor.
Symptoms
Small acoustic neuromas usually only interfere
with the functioning of the vestibulocochlear nerve.
The most common first symptom of an acoustic neuroma is hearing loss, which is often accompanied by a
ringing sound (tinnitis). People with acoustic neuromas sometimes report difficulties in using the phone
and difficulties in perceiving the tone of a musical
instrument or sound even when their hearing appears
to be otherwise normal. In most cases the hearing loss
is initially subtle and worsens gradually over time
until deafness occurs in the affected ear. In approximately 10% of cases the hearing loss is sudden and
severe.
Acoustic neuromas can also affect the functioning of the vestibular branch of the vestibulocochlear
nerve and van cause vertigo and dysequilibrium.
Twenty percent of small tumors are associated with
periodic vertigo, which is characterized by dizziness
or a whirling sensation. Larger acoustic neuromas are
less likely to cause vertigo but more likely to cause
dysequilibrium. Dysequilibrium, which is characterized by minor clumsiness and a general feeling of
instability, occurs in nearly 50% of people with an
acoustic neuroma.
As the tumor grows larger it can press on the
surrounding cranial nerves. Compression of the fifth
cranial nerve can result in facial pain and or numbness. Compression of the seventh cranial nerve can
cause spasms, weakness or paralysis of the facial
muscles. Double vision is a rare symptom but can
result when the 6th cranial nerve is affected.
Swallowing and/or speaking difficulties can occur if
the tumor presses against the 9th, 10th, or 12th cranial nerves.
If left untreated, the tumor can become large
enough to press against and affect the functioning
of the brain stem. The brain stem is the stalk like
portion of the brain that joins the spinal cord to the
cerebrum, the thinking and reasoning part of the
brain. Different parts of the brainstem have different
functions such as the control of breathing and muscle
coordination. Large tumors that impact the brain
stem can result in headaches, walking difficulties
(gait ataxia) and involuntary shaking movements of
the muscles (tremors). In rare cases when an acoustic
neuroma remains undiagnosed and untreated it can
cause nausea, vomiting, lethargy and eventually
coma, respiratory difficulties and death. In the vast
majority of cases, however, the tumor is discovered
and treated long before it is large enough to cause
such serious manifestations.
Diagnosis
Anyone with symptoms of hearing loss should
undergo hearing evaluations. Pure tone and speech
audiometry are two screening tests that are often
used to evaluate hearing. Pure tone audiometry
tests to see how well someone can hear tones of
different volume and pitch and speech audiometry
tests to see how well someone can hear and recognize speech. An acoustic neuroma is suspected in
someone with unilateral hearing loss or hearing loss
that is less severe in one ear than the other ear
(asymmetrical).
Sometimes an auditory brainstem response (ABR,
BAER) test is performed to help establish whether
someone is likely to have an acoustic neuroma.
During the ABR examination, a harmless electrical
impulse is passed from the inner ear to the brainstem.
An acoustic neuroma can interfere with the passage of
this electrical impulse and this interference can, sometimes be identified through the ABR evaluation.
A normal ABR examination does not rule out the
possibility of an acoustic neuroma. An abnormal
ABR examination increases the likelihood that an
acoustic neuroma is present but other tests are necessary to confirm the presence of a tumor.
If an acoustic neuroma is strongly suspected then
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is usually performed. The MRI is a very accurate evaluation that
is able to detect nearly 100% of acoustic neuromas.
Computerized tomography (CT scan, CAT scan)is
unable to identify smaller tumors; but it can be used
when an acoustic neuroma is suspected and an MRI
evaluation cannot be performed.
Once an acoustic neuroma is diagnosed, an evaluation by genetic specialists such as a geneticist and
genetic counselor may be recommended. The purpose
of this evaluation is to obtain a detailed family history
and check for signs of NF2. If NF2 is strongly suspected then DNA testing may be recommended. DNA
testing involves checking the blood cells obtained from
a routine blood draw for the common gene changes
associated with NF2.
Treatment
The three treatment options for acoustic neuroma
are surgery, radiation, and observation. The physician
and patient should discuss the pros and cons of
the different options prior to making a decision
about treatment. The patient’s, physical health, age,
symptoms, tumor size, and tumor location should be
considered.
Microsurgery
The surgical removal of the tumor or tumors is the
most common treatment for acoustic neuroma. In
most cases the entire tumor is removed during the
surgery. If the tumor is large and causing significant
symptoms, yet there is a need to preserve hearing
in that ear, then only part of the tumor may be
removed. During the procedure the tumor is removed
under microscopic guidance and general anesthetic.
Monitoring of the neighboring cranial nerves is done
during the procedure so that damage to these nerves
can be prevented. If preservation of hearing is a possibility, then monitoring of hearing will also take place
during the surgery.
Most people stay in the hospital four to seven days
following the surgery. Total recovery usually takes
four to six weeks. Most people experience fatigue and
head discomfort following the surgery. Problems with
balance and head and neck stiffness are also common.
The mortality rate of this type of surgery is less than
2% at most major centers. Approximately 20% of
patients experience some degree of post-surgical complications. In most cases these complications can be
managed successfully and do not result in long term
medical problems. Surgery brings with it a risk of
stroke, damage to the brain stem, infection, leakage
of spinal fluid and damage to the cranial nerves.
Hearing loss and/or tinnitis often result from the surgery. A follow-up MRI is recommended one to five
years following the surgery because of possible
regrowth of the tumor.
Stereotactic radiation therapy
During stereotactic radiation therapy, also called
radiosurgery or radiotherapy, many small beams of
radiation are aimed directly at the acoustic neuroma.
The radiation is administered in a single large dose,
under local anesthetic and is performed on an outpatient basis. This results in a high dose of radiation
to the tumor but little radiation exposure to the
surrounding area. This treatment approach is limited
to small or medium tumors. The goal of the surgery is
to cause tumor shrinkage or at least limit the growth
of the tumor. The long-term efficacy and risks of this
treatment approach are not known; however, as of
the early 2000s, more and more patients diagnosed
with acoustic neuromas are choosing this form of
therapy. Periodic MRI monitoring throughout the
life of the patient is therefore recommended.
Radiation therapy can cause hearing loss which
can sometimes occurs even years later. Radiation therapy can also cause damage to neighboring cranial
nerves, which can result in symptoms such as numbness, pain or paralysis of the facial muscles. In many
cases these symptoms are temporary. Radiation treatment can also induce the formation of other benign or
malignant schwannomas. This type of treatment may
therefore be contraindicated in the treatment of acoustic neuromas in those with NF2 who are predisposed
to developing schwannomas and other tumors.
Observation
Acoustic neuromas are usually slow growing and
in some cases they will stop growing and even become
smaller or disappear entirely. It may therefore be
appropriate in some cases to hold off on treatment
and to periodically monitor the tumor through MRI
evaluations. Long-term observation may be appropriate for example in an elderly person with a small
acoustic neuroma and few symptoms. Periodic observation may also be indicated for someone with a small
and asymptomatic acoustic neuroma that was
detected through an evaluation for another medical
problem. Observation may also be suggested for someone with an acoustic neuroma in the only hearing ear
or in the ear that has better hearing. The danger of an
observational approach is that as the tumor grows
larger it can become more difficult to treat.
Prognosis
The prognosis for someone with a unilateral
acoustic neuroma is usually quite good provided the
tumor is diagnosed early and appropriate treatment is
instituted. Long term-hearing loss and tinnitis in the
affected ear are common, even if appropriate treatment is provided. Many patients also experience
facial weakness, balance problems, and headaches.
Regrowth of the tumor is also a possibility following
surgery or radiation therapy and repeat treatment may
be necessary. The prognosis can be poorer for those
with NF2 who have an increased risk of bilateral
acoustic neuromas and other tumors.