Definition
Acromegaly is a disorder in which the abnormal release of a particular chemical from the pituitary gland in the brain causes increased growth in
bone and soft tissue, as well as a variety of other
disturbances throughout the body. This chemical
released from the pituitary gland is called growth
hormone (GH). The body’s ability to process and
use nutrients like fats and sugars is also altered. In
children whose bony growth plates have not closed,
the chemical changes of acromegaly result in
exceptional growth of long bones. This variant is
called gigantism, with the additional bone growth
causing unusual height. When the abnormality occurs
after bone growth stops, the disorder is called
acromegaly.
Description
Acromegaly is a relatively rare disorder, occurring
in approximately 50 out of every one million people
(50/1,000,000). Both men and women are affected.
Because the symptoms of acromegaly occur so gradually, diagnosis is often delayed. The majority of patients
are not identified until they are middle aged.
Causes and symptoms
The pituitary is a small gland located at the base of
the brain. A gland is a collection of cells that releases
certain chemicals, or hormones, which are important
to the functioning of other organs or body systems.
The pituitary hormones travel throughout the body
and are involved in a large number of activities,
including the regulation of growth and reproductive
functions. The cause of acromegaly can be traced to
the pituitary’s production of GH.
Under normal conditions, the pituitary receives
input from another brain structure, the hypothalamus,
located at the base of the brain. This input from the
hypothalamus regulates the pituitary’s release of hormones. For example, the hypothalamus produces
growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH), which
directs the pituitary to release GH. Input from the
hypothalamus should also direct the pituitary to stop
releasing hormones.
In acromegaly, the pituitary continues to release
GH and ignores signals from the hypothalamus. In the
liver, GH causes production of a hormone called insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), which is responsible
for growth throughout the body. When the pituitary
refuses to stop producing GH, the levels of IGF-1 also
reach abnormal peaks. Bones, soft tissue, and organs
throughout the body begin to enlarge, and the body
changes its ability to process and use nutrients like
sugars and fats.
In acromegaly, an individual’s hands and feet begin
to grow, becoming thick and doughy. The jaw line, nose,
and forehead also grow, and facial features are described
as ‘‘coarsening’’. The tongue grows larger, and because
the jaw is larger, the teeth become more widely spaced.
Due to swelling within the structures of the throat
and sinuses, the voice becomes deeper and sounds
more hollow, and patients may develop loud snoring.
Various hormonal changes cause symptoms such as:

heavy sweating

oily skin

increased coarse body hair

improper processing of sugars in the diet (and sometimes actual diabetes)
increased calcium in the urine (sometimes leading tokidney stones)

increased risk of gallstones; and

swelling of the thyroid gland
People with acromegaly have more skin tags, or
outgrowths of tissue, than normal. This increase in
skin tags is also associated with the development of
growths, called polyps, within the large intestine that
may eventually become cancerous. Patients with acromegaly often suffer from headaches and arthritis. The
various swellings and enlargements throughout the
body may press on nerves, causing sensations of local
tingling or burning, and sometimes result in muscle
weakness.
The most common cause of this disorder (in 90%
of patients) is the development of a noncancerous
tumor within the pituitary, called a pituitary adenoma.
These tumors are the source of the abnormal release of GH. As these tumors grow, they may press on nearby
structures within the brain, causing headaches and
changes in vision. As the adenoma grows, it may disrupt other pituitary tissue, interfering with the release
of other hormones. These disruptions may be responsible for changes in the menstrual cycle of women,
decreases in the sexual drive in men and women, and
the abnormal production of breast milk in women.
In rare cases, acromegaly is caused by the abnormal
production of GHRH, which leads to the increased
production of GH. Certain tumors in the pancreas,
lungs, adrenal glands, thyroid, and intestine produce
GHRH, which in turn triggers production of an
abnormal quantity of GH.
Diagnosis
Because acromegaly produces slow changes over
time, diagnosis is often significantly delayed. In fact,
the characteristic coarsening of the facial features is
often not recognized by family members, friends, or
long-time family physicians. Often, the diagnosis is
suspected by a new physician who sees the patient for
the first time and is struck by the patient’s characteristic facial appearance. Comparing old photographs
from a number of different time periods will often
increase suspicion of the disease.
Because the quantity of GH produced varies
widely under normal conditions, demonstrating high
levels of GH in the blood is not sufficient to merit a
diagnosis of acromegaly. Instead, laboratory tests measuring an increase of IGF-1 (3-10 times above the
normal level) are useful. These results, however, must
be carefully interpreted because normal laboratory
values for IGF-1 vary when the patient is pregnant,
undergoing puberty, elderly, or severely malnourished.
Normal patients will show a decrease in GH production when given a large dose of sugar (glucose). Patients
with acromegaly will not show this decrease, and will
often show an increase in GH production. Magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) is useful for viewing the
pituitary, and for identifying and locating an adenoma.
When no adenoma can be located, the search for a
GHRH-producing tumor in another location begins.
Treatment
The first step in treatment of acromegaly is
removal of all or part of the pituitary adenoma.
Removal requires surgery, usually performed by
entering the skull through the nose. While this surgery
an cause rapid improvement of many acromegaly
symptoms, most patients will also require additional
treatment with medication. Bromocriptine (Parlodel)
is a medication that can be taken by mouth, while
octreotide (Sandostatin) must be injected every eight
hours. Both of these medications are helpful in reducing GH production, but must often be taken for life
and produce their own unique side effects. Some
patients who cannot undergo surgery are treated
with radiation therapy to the pituitary in an attempt
to shrink the adenoma. Radiating the pituitary may
take up to 10 years, however, and may also injure/
destroy other normal parts of the pituitary.
Prognosis
Without treatment, patients with acromegaly will
most likely die early because of the disease’s effects on the heart, lungs, brain, or due to the development of
cancer in the large intestine. With treatment, however,
a patient with acromegaly may be able to live a normal
lifespan.