Definition
Acrocyanosis is a decrease in the amount of
oxygen delivered to the extremities. The hands and
feet turn blue because of the lack of oxygen.
Decreased blood supply to the affected areas is caused
by constriction or spasm of small blood vessels.
Description
Acrocyanosis is a painless disorder caused by constriction or narrowing of small blood vessels in the
skin of affected patients. The spasm of the blood
vessels decreases the amount of blood that passes
through them, resulting in less blood being delivered
to the hands and feet. The hands may be the main area
affected. The affected areas turn blue and become cold
and sweaty. Localized swelling may also occur.
Emotion and cold temperatures can worsen the symptoms, while warmth can decrease symptoms. The disease is seen mainly in women and the effect of the
disorder is mainly cosmetic. People with the disease
tend to be uncomfortable, with sweaty, cold, bluish
colored hands and feet.
Causes and symptoms
The sympathetic nerves cause constriction or
spasms in the peripheral blood vessels that supply
blood to the extremities. The spasms are a contraction
of the muscles in the walls of the blood vessels. The
contraction decreases the internal diameter of the
blood vessels, thereby decreasing the amount of
blood flow through the affected area. The spasms
occur on a persistent basis, resulting in long term
reduction of blood supply to the hands and feet.
Sufficient blood still passes through the blood vessels
so that the tissue in the affected areas does not starve
for oxygen or die. Mainly, blood vessels near the surface of the skin are affected.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is made by observation of the main
clinical symptoms, including persistently blue and
sweaty hands and/or feet and a lack of pain. Cooling
the hands increases the blueness, while warming the
hands decreases the blue color. The acrocyanosis
patient’s pulse is normal, which rules out obstructive
diseases. Raynaud’s disease differs from acrocyanosis
in that it causes white and red skin coloration phases,
not just bluish discoloration.
Treatment
Acrocyanosis usually isn’t treated. Drugs that
block the uptake of calcium (calcium channel blockers)
and alpha-one antagonists reduce the symptoms in
most cases. Drugs that dilate blood vessels are
only effective some of the time. Sweating from the
affected areas can be profuse and require treatment.
Surgery to cut the sympathetic nerves is performed
rarely.
Prognosis
Acrocyanosis is a benign and persistent disease.
The main concern of patients is cosmetic. Left
untreated, the disease does not worsen.