Definition
Acute kidney failure occurs when illness, infection, or injury damages the kidneys. Temporarily, the
kidneys cannot adequately remove fluids and wastes
from the body or maintain the proper level of certain
kidney-regulated chemicals in the bloodstream.
Description
The kidneys are the body’s natural filtration
system. They perform the critical task of processing approximately 200 quarts of fluid in the
bloodstream every 24 hours. Waste products like
urea and toxins, along with excess fluids, are
removed from the bloodstream in the form of
urine. Kidney (or renal) failure occurs when kidney
functioning becomes impaired. Fluids and toxins
begin to accumulate in the bloodstream. As fluids
build up in the bloodstream, the patient with acute
kidney failure may become puffy and swollen (edematous) in the face, hands, and feet. Their blood
pressure typically begins to rise, and they may
experience fatigue and nausea.
Unlike chronic kidney failure, which is long
term and irreversible, acute kidney failure is a
temporary condition. With proper and timely treatment, it can typically be reversed. Often there is no
permanent damage to the kidneys. Acute kidney
failure appears most frequently as a complication
of serious illness, like heart failure, liver failure,
dehydration, severe burns, and excessive bleeding
(hemorrhage). It may also be caused by an
obstruction to the urinary tract or as a direct result
of kidney disease, injury, or an adverse reaction to
a medicine.
Causes and symptoms
Acute kidney failure can be caused by many different illnesses, injuries, and infections. These conditions
fall into three main categories: prerenal, postrenal, and
intrarenal conditions.
Prerenal conditions do not damage the kidney,
but can cause diminished kidney function. They are
the most common cause of acute renal failure, and
include:

dehydration

hemorrhage

septicemia, or sepsis

heart failure

liver failure

burns
Postrenal conditions cause kidney failure by
obstructing the urinary tract. These conditions
include:

inflammation of the prostate gland in men
(prostatitis)

enlargement of the prostate gland (benign prostatic
hypertrophy)

bladder or pelvic tumors

kidney stones (calculi)
Intrarenal conditions involve kidney disease
or direct injury to the kidneys. These conditions
include:

lack of blood supply to the kidneys (ischemia)

use of radiocontrast agents in patients with kidney
problems

drug abuse or overdose

long-term use of nephrotoxic medications, like certain pain medicines

acute inflammation of the glomeruli, or filters, of the
kidney (glomerulonephritis)

kidney infections (pyelitis or pyelonephritis).
lude:

anemia. The kidneys are responsible for producing
erythropoietin (EPO), a hormone that stimulates red
blood cell production. If kidney disease causes
shrinking of the kidney, red blood cell production is
reduced, leading to anemia.

bad breath or bad taste in mouth. Urea in the saliva
may cause an ammonia-like taste in the mouth.

bone and joint problems. The kidneys produce
vitamin D, which helps the body absorb calcium
and keeps bones strong. For patients with kidney
failure, bones may become brittle. In children,
normal growth may be stunted. Joint pain may
also occur as a result of high phosphate levels
in the blood. Retention of uric acid may cause
gout.

edema. Puffiness or swelling in the arms, hands, feet,
and around the eyes.

frequent urination.

foamy or bloody urine. Protein in the urine may
cause it to foam significantly. Blood in the urine
may indicate bleeding from diseased or obstructed
kidneys, bladder, or ureters.

headaches. High blood pressure may trigger
headaches.

hypertension, or high blood pressure. The retention
of fluids and wastes causes blood volume to increase.
This makes blood pressure rise.

increased fatigue. Toxic substances in the blood and
the presence of anemia may cause the patient to feel
exhausted.

itching. Phosphorus, normally eliminated in the
urine, accumulates in the blood of patients with
kidney failure. An increased phosphorus level may
cause the skin to itch.

lower back pain. Patients suffering from certain kidney problems (like kidney stones and other obstructions) may have pain where the kidneys are located,
in the small of the back below the ribs.

nausea. Urea in the gastric juices may cause upset
stomach.
Diagnosis
Kidney failure is diagnosed by a doctor. A
nephrologist, a doctor that specializes in the kidney, may be consulted to confirm the diagnosis and
recommend treatment options. The patient that is
suspected of having acute kidney failure will have
blood and urine tests to determine the level of
kidney function. A blood test will assess the levels
of creatinine, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), uric
acid, phosphate, sodium, and potassium. The kidney regulates these agents in the blood. Urine samples will also be collected, usually over a 24-hour
period, to assess protein loss and/or creatinine
clearance.
Determining the cause of kidney failure is critical
to proper treatment. A full assessment of the kidneys
is necessary to determine if the underlying disease
is treatable and if the kidney failure is chronic or
acute. X rays, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),
computed tomography scan (CT), ultrasound, renal
biopsy, and/or arteriogram of the kidneys may be
used to determine the cause of kidney failure and
level of remaining kidney function. X rays and ultrasound of the bladder and/or ureters may also be
needed.
Treatment
Treatment for acute kidney failure varies.
Treatment is directed to the underlying, primary medical condition that has triggered kidney failure.
Prerenal conditions may be treated with replacement
fluids given through a vein, diuretics, blood transfusion,
or medications. Postrenal conditions and intrarenal
conditions may require surgery and/or medication.
Frequently, patients in acute kidney failure
require hemodialysis, hemofiltration, or peritoneal
dialysis to filter fluids and wastes from the bloodstream until the primary medical condition can be
controlled.
Hemodialysis
Hemodialysis involves circulating the patient’s
blood outside of the body through an extracorporeal
circuit (ECC), or dialysis circuit. The ECC is made up
of plastic blood tubing, a filter known as a dialyzer (or
artificial kidney), and a dialysis machine that monitors
and maintains blood flow and administers dialysate.
Dialysate is a sterile chemical solution that is used to
draw waste products out of the blood. The patient’s
blood leaves the body through the vein and travels
through the ECC and the dialyzer, where fluid
removal takes place.
During dialysis, waste products in the bloodstream are carried out of the body. At the same time,
electrolytes and other chemicals are added to the
blood. The purified, chemically-balanced blood is
then returned to the body.
A dialysis ‘‘run’’ typically lasts three to four hours,
depending on the type of dialyzer used and the physical
condition of the patient. Dialysis is used several times a
week until acute kidney failure is reversed.
Blood pressure changes associated with hemodialysis may pose a risk for patients with heart problems.
Peritoneal dialysis may be the preferred treatment
option in these cases.
Hemofiltration
Hemofiltration, also called continuous renal
replacement therapy (CRRT), is a slow, continuous
blood filtration therapy used to control acute kidney
failure in critically ill patients. These patients are
typically very sick and may have heart problems or
circulatory problems. They cannot handle the rapid
filtration rates of hemodialysis. They also frequently
need antibiotics, nutrition, vasopressors, and other
fluids given through a vein to treat their primary
condition. Because hemofiltration is continuous,
prescription fluids can be given to patients in kidney
failure without the risk of fluid overload.
Like hemodialysis, hemofiltration uses an ECC.
A hollow fiber hemofilter is used instead of a dialyzer
to remove fluids and toxins. Instead of a dialysis
machine, a blood pump makes the blood flow through
the ECC. The volume of blood circulating through
the ECC in hemofiltration is less than that in hemodialysis. Filtration rates are slower and gentler on the
circulatory system. Hemofiltration treatment will
generally be used until kidney failure is reversed.
Peritoneal dialysis
Peritoneal dialysis may be used if an acute kidney
failure patient is stable and not in immediate crisis.
In peritoneal dialysis (PD), the lining of the patient’s
abdomen, the peritoneum, acts as a blood filter.
A flexible tube-like instrument (catheter) is surgically
inserted into the patient’s abdomen. During treatment, the catheter is used to fill the abdominal cavity
with dialysate. Waste products and excess fluids move
from the patient’s bloodstream into the dialysate
solution. After a certain time period, the waste-filled
dialysate is drained from the abdomen, and replaced
with clean dialysate. There are three type of peritoneal
dialysis, which vary according to treatment time and
administration method.
Peritoneal dialysis is often the best treatment
option for infants and children. Their small size can
make vein access difficult to maintain. It is not recommended for patients with abdominal adhesions or
other abdominal defects (like a hernia) that might
reduce the efficiency of the treatment. It is also not
recommended for patients who suffer frequent bouts
of an inflammation of the small pouches in the intestinal tract (diverticulitis).
Prognosis
Because many of the illnesses and underlying
conditions that often trigger acute kidney failure
are critical, the prognosis for these patients many
times is not good. Studies have estimated overall
death rates for acute kidney failure at 42-88%.
Many people, however, die because of the primary
disease that has caused the kidney failure. These
figures may also be misleading because patients
who experience kidney failure as a result of less
serious illnesses (like kidney stones or dehydration)
have an excellent chance of complete recovery.
Early recognition and prompt, appropriate treatment are key to patient recovery.
Up to 10% of patients who experience acute
kidney failure will suffer irreversible kidney damage.
They will eventually go on to develop chronic kidney
failure or end-stage renal disease. These patients will
require long-term dialysis or kidney transplantation to
replace their lost renal functioning.
Prevention
Since acute kidney failure can be caused by many
things, prevention is difficult. Medications that may
impair kidney function should be given cautiously.
Patients with pre-existing kidney conditions who are
hospitalized for other illnesses or injuries should be
carefully monitored for kidney failure complications.
Treatments and procedures that may put them at risk
for kidney failure (like diagnostic tests requiring radiocontrast agents or dyes) should be used with extreme
caution.