Definition
Acute poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis
(APSGN) is an inflammation of the kidney tubules
(glomeruli) that filter waste products from the blood,
following a streptococcal infection such as strep
throat. APSGN is also called postinfectious
glomerulonephritis.
Description
APSGN develops after certain streptococcal
bacteria (group A beta-hemolytic streptococci) have
infected the skin or throat. Antigens from the dead
streptococci clump together with the antibodies that
killed them. These clumps are trapped in the kidney
tubules, cause the tubules to become inflamed, and
impair that organs’ ability to filter and eliminate
body wastes. The onset of APSGN usually occurs
one to six weeks (average two weeks) after the streptococcal infection.
APSGN is a relatively uncommon disease affecting about one of every 10,000 people, although four or
five times that many may actually be affected by it
but show no symptoms. APSGN is most prevalent
among boys between the ages of 3 and 7, but it can
occur at any age.
Causes and symptoms
Frequent sore throats and a history of streptococcal infection increase the risk of acquiring APSGN.
Symptoms of APSGN include:

fluid accumulation and tissue swelling (edema)
initially in the face and around the eyes, later in
the legs

low urine output (oliguria)

blood in the urine (hematuria)

protein in the urine (proteinuria)

high blood pressure

joint pain or stiffness
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of APSGN is made by taking the
patient’s history, assessing his/her symptoms, and
performing certain laboratory tests. Urinalysis
usually shows blood and protein in the urine.
Concentrations of urea and creatinine (two waste
products normally filtered out of the blood by the
kidneys) in the blood are often high, indicating
impaired kidney function. A reliable, inexpensive
blood test called the anti-streptolysin-O test can
confirm that a patient has or has had a streptococcal infection. A throat culture may also show the
presence of group A beta-hemolytic streptococci.
Treatment
Treatment of ASPGN is designed to relieve the
symptoms and prevent complications. Some patients
are advised to stay in bed until they feel better and
to restrict fluid and salt intake. Antibiotics may be
prescribed to kill any lingering streptococcal bacteria,
if their presence is confirmed. Antihypertensives may
be given to help control high blood pressure and
diuretics may be used to reduce fluid retention and
swelling. Kidney dialysis is rarely needed.
Prognosis
Most children (up to 95%) fully recover from
APSGN in a matter of weeks or months. Most adults
(up to 70%) also recover fully. In those who do
not recover fully, chronic or progressive problems of
kidney function may occur. Kidney failure may result
in some patients.
Prevention
Receiving prompt treatment for streptococcal
infections may prevent APSGN.