Definition
Addiction is a persistent, compulsive dependence
on a behavior or substance. The term has been partially replaced by the word dependence for substance
abuse. Addiction has been extended, however, to
include mood-altering behaviors or activities. Some
researchers speak of two types of addictions: substance addictions (for example, alcoholism, drug
abuse, and smoking); and process addictions (for
example, gambling, spending, shopping, eating, and
sexual activity). There is a growing recognition that
many addicts, such as polydrug abusers, are addicted
to more than one substance or process.
Description
Addiction is one of the most costly public
health problems in the United States. It is a progressive syndrome, which means that it increases in
severity over time unless it is treated. Substance
abuse is characterized by frequent relapse, or return
to the abused substance. Substance abusers often
make repeated attempts to quit before they are
successful.
The economic cost of substance abuse in the
United States exceeds $414 billion, with health care
costs attributed to substance abuse estimated at more
than $114 billion.
By eighth grade, 52% of adolescents have consumed alcohol, 41% have smoked tobacco, and 20%
have smoked marijuana. Compared to females, males
are almost four times as likely to be heavy drinkers,
nearly one and a half more likely to smoke a pack or
more of cigarettes daily, and twice as likely to smoke
marijuana weekly. However, among adolescents
these gender differences are not as pronounced and
girls are almost as likely to abuse substances such
as alcohol and cigarettes. Although frequent use
of tobacco, cocaine and heavy drinking appears
to remain stable in the 1990s, marijuana use has
increased.
An estimated four million Americans over the age
of 12 used prescription pain relievers, sedatives, and
stimulants for ‘‘nonmedical’’ reasons during one
month.
In the United States, 25% of the population regularly uses tobacco. Tobacco use reportedly kills 2.5
times as many people each year as alcohol and drug
abuse combined. According to data from the World
Health Organization, there were 1.1 billion smokers
worldwide and 10,000 tobacco-related deaths per
day. Furthermore, in the United States, 43% of children aged 2-11 years are exposed to environmental
tobacco smoke, which has been implicated in sudden
infant death syndrome, low birth weight, asthma, middle ear disease, pneumonia, cough, and upper respiratory infection.
Eating disorders, such as anorexia nervosa,
bulimia nervosa, and binge eating, affect more than
five million American women and men. Fifteen percent of young women have substantially disordered
attitudes toward eating and eating behaviors. More
than 1,000 women die each year from anorexia
nervosa.
A Harvard study found that an estimated 15.4
million Americans suffered from a gambling addiction.
More than one-half (7.9 million) were adolescents.
Causes and symptoms
Addiction to substances results from the interaction of several factors:
Drug chemistry
Some substances are more addictive than others,
either because they produce a rapid and intense
change in mood; or because they produce painful
withdrawal symptoms when stopped suddenly.
Genetic factor
Some people appear to be more vulnerable to
addiction because their body chemistry increases
their sensitivity to drugs. Some forms of substance
abuse and dependence seem to run in families; and
this may be the result of a genetic predisposition,
environmental influences, or a combination of both.
Brain structure and function
Using drugs repeatedly over time changes brain
structure and function in fundamental and long-lasting ways. Addiction comes about through an array of
changes in the brain and the strengthening of new
memory connections. Evidence suggests that those
long-lasting brain changes are responsible for the distortions of cognitive and emotional functioning that
characterize addicts, particularly the compulsion to
use drugs. Although the causes of addiction remain
the subject of ongoing debate and research, many
experts now consider addiction to be a brain disease:
a condition caused by persistent changes in brain
structure and function. However, having this brain
disease does not absolve the addict of responsibility
for his or her behavior, but it does explain why many
addicts cannot stop using drugs by sheer force of will
alone.
Scientists may have come closer to solving the
brain’s specific involvement in addiction in 2004.
Psychiatrists say they have found the craving center
of the brain that triggers relapse in addicts. The anterior cingulated cortex in the frontal lobe of the brain is
the area responsible for long-term craving in addicts.
Knowing the area of the brain from which long-term
cravings come may help scientists pinpoint therapies.
Social learning
Social learning is considered the most important
single factor in addiction. It includes patterns of use in
the addict’s family or subculture, peer pressure, and
advertising or media influence.
Availability
Inexpensive or readily available tobacco, alcohol,
or drugs produce marked increases in rates of
addiction.
Individual development
Before the 1980s, the so-called addictive personality was used to explain the development of addiction. The addictive personality was described as
escapist, impulsive, dependent, devious, manipulative,
and self-centered. Many doctors now believe that
these character traits develop in addicts as a result of
the addiction, rather than the traits being a cause of
the addiction.
Diagnosis
In addition to a preoccupation with using and
acquiring the abused substance, the diagnosis of
addiction is based on five criteria:

loss of willpower

harmful consequences

unmanageable lifestyle

tolerance or escalation of use

withdrawal symptoms upon quitting
Treatment
Treatment requires both medical and social
approaches. Substance addicts may need hospital treatment to manage withdrawal symptoms. Individual or
group psychotherapy is often helpful, but only after
substance use has stopped. Anti-addiction medications,
such as methadone and naltrexone, are also commonly
used. A new treatment option has been developed that
allows family physicians to treat heroine addiction
from their offices rather than sending patients to
methadone clinics. The drug is called buprenorphine
(Suboxone).
Researchers continue to work to identify workable pharmacological treatments for various addictions. In 2004, clinical trials were testing a number of
drugs currently in use for other diseases and conditions to see if they could be used to treat addiction.
This would speed up their approval by the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration (FDA). For example,
cocaine withdrawal is eased by boosting dopamine
levels in the brain, so scientists are studying drugs
that boost dopamine, such as Ritalin, which is used
to treat attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, and
amantadine, a drug used for flu and Parkinson’s
diease.
The most frequently recommended social form of
outpatient treatment is the twelve-step program. Such
programs are also frequently combined with psychotherapy. According to a recent study reported
by the American Psychological Association (APA),
anyone, regardless of his or her religious beliefs or
lack of religious beliefs, can benefit from participation
in 12-step programs such as Alcoholics Anonymous
(AA) or Narcotics Anonymous (NA). The number of
visits to 12-step self-help groups exceeds the number of
visits to all mental health professionals combined.
There are twelve-step groups for all major substance
and process addictions.
The Twelve Steps are:

Admit powerlessness over the addiction.

Believe that a Power greater than oneself could
restore sanity.

Make a decision to turn your will and your life over
to the care of God, as you understand him.

Make a searching and fearless moral inventory of
self.

Admit to God, yourself, and another human being
the exact nature of your wrongs.

Become willing to have God remove all these defects
from your character.

Humbly ask God to remove shortcomings.

Make a list of all persons harmed by your wrongs
and become willing to make amends to them all.
Make direct amends to such people, whenever possible except when to do so would injure them or others.

Continue to take personal inventory and promptly
admit any future wrongdoings.

Seek to improve contact with a God of the individual’s understanding through meditation and prayer.

Carry the message of spiritual awakening to others
and practice these principles in all your affairs.
Prognosis
The prognosis for recovery from any addiction
depends on the substance or process, the individual’s
circumstances, and underlying personality structure.
Polydrug users have the worst prognosis for recovery.
Prevention
The most effective form of prevention appears to
be a stable family that models responsible attitudes
toward mood-altering substances and behaviors.
Prevention education programs are also widely used
to inform the public of the harmfulness of substance
abuse.