Definition
Adenoid hyperplasia is the overenlargement of
the lymph glands located above the back of the mouth.
Description
Located at the back of the mouth above and
below the soft palate are two pairs of lymph glands.
The tonsils below are clearly visible behind the back
teeth; the adenoids lie just above them and are hidden
from view by the palate. Together these four arsenals
of immune defense guard the major entrance to the
body from foreign invaders–the germs we breathe and
eat. In contrast to the rest of the body’s tissues, lymphoid tissue reaches its greatest size in mid-childhood
and recedes thereafter. In this way children are best
able to develop the immunities they need to survive in
a world full of infectious diseases.
Beyond its normal growth pattern, lymphoid tissue grows excessively (hypertrophies) during an acute
infection, as it suddenly increases its immune activity
to fight off the invaders. Often it does not completely
return to its former size. Each subsequent infection
leaves behind a larger set of tonsils and adenoids. To
make matters worse, the sponge-like structure of these
hypertrophied glands can produce safe havens for
germs where the body cannot reach and eliminate
them. Before antibiotics and the reduction in infectious
childhood diseases over the past few generations, tonsils and adenoids caused greater health problems.
Causes and symptoms
Most tonsil and adenoid hypertrophy is simply
caused by the normal growth pattern for that type of
tissue. Less often, the hypertrophy is due to repeated
throat infections by cold viruses, strep throat, mononucleosis, and in times gone by, diphtheria. The acute
infections are usually referred to as tonsillitis, the adenoids getting little recognition because they cannot be
seen without special instruments. Symptoms include
painful, bright red, often ulcerated tonsils, enlargement of lymph nodes (glands) beneath the jaw, fever,
and general discomfort.
After the acute infection subsides, symptoms are
generated simply by the size of the glands. Extremely
large tonsils can impair breathing and swallowing,
although that is quite rare. Large adenoids can impair
nose breathing and require a child to breathe through
the mouth. Because they encircle the only connection
hypertrophied adenoids can also obstruct it and
cause middle ear infections.
Diagnosis
A simple tongue blade depressing the tongue
allows an adequate view of the tonsils. Enlarged tonsils may have deep pockets (crypts) containing dead
tissue (necrotic debris). Viewing adenoids requires a
small mirror or fiberoptic scope. A child with recurring
middle ear infections may well have large adenoids. A
throat culture or mononucleosis test will usually reveal
the identity of the germ.
Treatment
It used to be standard practice to remove tonsils
and/or adenoids after a few episodes of acute throat or
ear infection. The surgery is called tonsillectomy and
adenoidectomy (T and A). Opinion changed as it was
realized that this tissue is beneficial to the development
of immunity. For instance, children without tonsils
and adenoids produce only half the immunity to oral
polio vaccine. In addition, treatment of ear and throat
infections with antibiotics and of recurring ear infections with surgical drainage through the ear drum
(tympanostomy) has greatly reduced the incidence of
surgical removal of these lymph glands.
Alternative treatment
There are many botanical/herbal remedies that
can be used alone or in formulas to locally assist the
tonsils and adenoids in their immune function at the
opening of the oral cavity and to tone these glands.
Keeping the Eustachian tubes open is an important
contribution to optimal function in the tonsils and
adenoids. Food allergies are often the culprits for
recurring ear infections, as well as tonsilitis and adenoiditis. Identification and removal of the allergic
food(s) can greatly assist in alleviating the cause of
the problem. Acute tonsillitis also benefits from
warm saline gargles.
Prognosis
Hypertrophied adenoids are a normal part of
growing up and should be respected for their important role in the development of immunity. Only when
their size causes problems by obstructing breathing or
middle ear drainage do they demand intervention.
Prevention
Prevention can be directed toward prompt evaluation and appropriate treatment of sore throats to prevent overgrowth of adenoid tissue. Avoiding other
children with acute respiratory illness will also reduce
the spread of these common illnesses