Adenoviruses are DNA viruses (small infectious agents) that cause upper respiratory tract infections,
conjunctivitis, and other infections in humans.
Description
Adenoviruses were discovered in 1953. About 47
different types have been identified since then, and
about half of them are believed to cause human diseases. Infants and children are most commonly
affected by adenoviruses. Adenovirus infections can
occur throughout the year, but seem to be most common from fall to spring.
Adenoviruses are responsible for 3-5% of acute
respiratory infections in children and 2% of respiratory illnesses in civilian adults. They are more apt to
cause infection among military recruits and other
young people who live in institutional environments.
Outbreaks among children are frequently reported at
boarding schools and summer camps. Another example includes an increased outbreak of gastroenteritis
among cruise passengers in 2002.
Acquired immunity
Most children have been infected by at least one
adenovirus by the time they reach school age. Most
adults have acquired immunity to multiple adenovirus
types due to infections they had as children.
In one mode of adenovirus infection (called lytic
infection because it destroys large numbers of cells),
adenoviruses kill healthy cells and replicate up to
one million new viruses per cell killed (of which 1-5%
are infectious). People with this kind of infection feel
sick. In chronic or latent infection, a much smaller number of viruses are released and healthy cells can multiply
more rapidly than they are destroyed. People who have
this kind of infection don’t seem to be sick. This is
probably why many adults have immunity to adenoviruses without realizing they have been infected.
Childhood infections
In children, adenoviruses most often cause acute
upper respiratory infections with fever and runny nose.
Adenovirus types 1, 2, 3, 5, and 6 are responsible for most
of these infections. Occasionally more serious lower
respiratory diseases, such as pneumonia, may occur.
Adenoviruses also cause acute pharyngoconjunctival feverin children. This disease is most often caused
by types 3 and 7. Symptoms, which appear suddenly
and usually disappear in less than a week, include:

inflammation of the lining of the eyelid (conjunctivitis)

fever

sore throat (pharyngitis)

runny nose

inflammation of lymph glands in the neck (cervical
adenitis)
Adenoviruses also cause acute diarrhea in young
children, characterized by fever and watery stools.
This condition is caused by adenovirus types 40 and
41 and can last as long as two weeks.
As much as 51% of all hemorrhagic cystitis
(inflammation of the bladder and of the tubes that
carry urine to the bladder from the kidneys) in
American and Japanese children can be attributed to
adenovirus infection. A child who has hemorrhagic
cystitis has bloody urine for about three days, and
invisible traces of blood can be found in the urine a
few days longer. The child will feel the urge to urinate
frequently–but find it difficult to do so–for about the
same length of time.
Adult infections
In adults, the most frequently reported adenovirus infection is acute respiratory disease (ARD,
caused by types 4 and 7) in military recruits.
Influenza-like symptoms including fever, sore throat,
runny nose, and cough are almost always present;
weakness, chills, headache, and swollen lymph glands
in the neck also may occur. The symptoms typically
last three to five days.
Epidemic keratoconjunctivitis (EKC, caused by
adenovirus types 8, 19, and 37) was first seen in shipyard workers whose eyes had been slightly injured by
chips of rust or paint. This inflammation of tissues
lining the eyelid and covering the front of the eyeball
also can be caused by using contaminated contact lens
solutions or by drying the hands or face with a towel
used by someone who has this infection.
The inflamed, sticky eyelids characteristic of
conjunctivitis develop 4-24 days after exposure and
last between one and four weeks. Only 5-8% of
patients with epidemic keratoconjunctivitis experience
respiratory symptoms. One or both eyes may be
affected. As symptoms of conjunctivitis subside, eye
pain and watering and blurred vision develop. These
symptoms of keratitis may last for several months, and
about 10% of these infections spread to at least one
other member of the patient’s household.
Other illnesses associated with adenovirus include:

encephalitis (inflammation of the brain) and other
infections of the central nervous system (CNS)

gastroenteritis (inflammation of the stomach and
intestines)

acute mesenteric lymphadenitis (inflammation of
lymph glands in the abdomen)

chronic interstitial fibrosis (abnormal growth of
connective tissue between cells)

intussusception (a type of intestinal obstruction)

pneumonia that doesn’t respond to antibiotic therapy

whooping cough syndrome when Bordetella pertussis
(the bacterium that causes classic whooping cough) is
not found
Causes and symptoms
Specific adenovirus infections can be traced to
particular sources and produce distinctive symptoms.
In general, however, adenovirus infection is caused by:

inhaling airborne viruses

getting the virus in the eyes by swimming in contaminated water, using contaminated eye solutions or
instruments, wiping the eyes with contaminated
towels, or rubbing the eyes with contaminated fingers.

not washing the hands after using the bathroom, and
then touching the mouth or eyes
Symptoms common to most types of adenovirus
infections include:

cough

fever

runny nose

sore throat

watery eyes
Diagnosis
Although symptoms may suggest the presence of
adenovirus, distinguishing these infections from other
viruses can be difficult. A definitive diagnosis is based
on culture or detection of the virus in eye secretions,
sputum, urine, or stool.
The extent of infection can be estimated from the
results of blood tests that measure increases in the
quantity of antibodies the immune system produces to
fight it. Antibody levels begin to rise about a week after
infection occurs and remain elevated for about a year.
Treatment
Treatment of adenovirus infections is usually
supportive and aimed at relieving symptoms of the
illness. Bed rest may be recommended along with
medications to reduce fever and/or pain. (Aspirin
should not be given to children because of concerns
about Reye’s syndrome.) Eye infections may benefit
from topical corticosteroids to relieve symptoms and
shorten the course of the disease. Hospitalization is
usually required for severe pneumonia in infants and
for EKC (to prevent blindness). No effective antiviral
drugs have been developed.
Prognosis
Adenovirus infections are rarely fatal. Most
patients recover fully.
Prevention
Practicing good personal hygiene and avoiding
people with infectious illnesses can reduce the
risk of developing adenovirus infection. Proper handwashing can prevent the spread of the virus by oralfecal transmission. Sterilization of instruments and
solutions used in the eye can prevent the spread of
EKC, as can adequate chlorination of swimming
pools.
A vaccine for pertussis has been developed
and is in use in combination with diphtheria and tetanus vaccines for infants. It is shown to have nearly
90% efficacy. A vaccine containing live adenovirus
types 4 and 7 is used to control disease in military
recruits, but it is not recommended or available for
civilian use. A recent resurgence of the adenovirus
was found in a military population as soon as the
vaccination program was halted. Vaccines prepared
from purified subunits of adenovirus are under
investigation.