Definition
Adhesions are fibrous bands of scar tissue that
form between internal organs and tissues, joining
them together abnormally.
Description
Adhesions are made up of blood vessels and fibroblasts—connective tissue cells. They form as a normal
part of the body’s healing process and help to limit
the spread of infection. However when adhesions
cause the wrong tissues to grow into each other,
many different complex inflammatory disorders can
arise. Worldwide millions of people suffer pain and
dysfunction due to adhesion disease.
Depending on their location, the most common
types of adhesions may called:

abdominal adhesions

intestinal adhesions

intraperitoneal adhesions

pelvic adhesions

intrauterine adhesions or Asherman’s syndrome.
Adhesions can form between various tissues in the
body including:

loops of the intestines

the intestines and other abdominal organs or the
abdominal wall

abdominal organs such as the liver or bladder and
the abdominal wall

tissues of the uterus.
Although adhesions can be congenital (present at
birth) or result from inflammation, injury, or infection, the vast majority of adhesions form following
surgery. Adhesions are a major complication of
many common surgical procedures and may occur in
55% to more than 90% of patients, depending on the
type of surgery.
All abdominal surgeries carry the risk of adhesion
formation. Abdominal adhesions are rare in people
who have not had abdominal surgery and very common in people who have had multiple abdominal surgeries. Adhesions are more common following
procedures involving the intestines, colon, appendix,
or uterus. They are less common following surgeries
involving the stomach, gall bladder, or pancreas.
Although most abdominal adhesions do not cause
problems, they can be painful when stretched or pulled
because the scar tissue is not elastic.
Postoperative intestinal adhesions are a major
cause of intestinal or small bowel obstruction (SBO).
In a small number of people the scar tissue pulls sections of the small or large intestines out of place and
partially or completely blocks the passage of food and
fluids. Thus SBOs can result from abdominal surgery
and also are one of the most common reasons for
abdominal surgery. Although intestinal obstruction
is fatal in about 5% of patients, the mortality rate
associated with SBO has decreased dramatically over
the past century.
Intrauterine adhesions are relatively common in
women and the majority of women undergoing gynecological surgery develop postoperative adhesions.
Sometimes these pelvic adhesions cause chronic pelvic
pain and/or infertility.
Adhesions can cause a rare form of glaucoma
called irido corneal endothelial (ICE) syndrome. In
this disorder cells from the back surface of the cornea
of the eye spread over the surface of the iris and the
tissue that drains the eye, forming adhesions that bind
the iris to the cornea and causing further blockage of
the drainage channels. This blockage increases the
pressure inside the eye, which may damage the optic
nerve. ICE syndrome occurs most often in lightskinned females.
Causes and symptoms
Post-surgical adhesions
Common causes of postoperative adhesions
include:

abdominal surgery

gynecological surgery

thoracic surgery

orthopedic surgery

plastic surgery.
Abdominal adhesions most often result from surgeries in which the organs are handled or temporarily
moved. Intrauterine adhesions form after surgeries
involving the uterus, particularly curettage—the
scraping of the uterine contents. Surgery to control
uterine bleeding after giving birth also can lead to
intrauterine adhesions. Such adhesions can cause
Asherman’s syndrome, closing the uterus and preventing menstruation.
Other causes of adhesions
Any inflammation or infection of the membranes
that line the abdominal and pelvic walls and enclose
the organs—the peritoneum—can cause adhesions.
An example peritonitis, a severe infection that can
result from appendicitis, may lead to adhesions. In
addition to surgery or injury, pelvic adhesions can be
caused by inflammation resulting from an infection
such as pelvic inflammatory disease (PID).
Symptoms
In the majority of people adhesions do not cause
symptoms or serious problems. However in some people adhesions can lead to a variety of disorders. The
symptoms depend on the type of adhesion and the
tissues that are involved. Adhesions may cause pain
and/or fever in some people.
ABDOMINAL OBSTRUCTION. If a loop of intestine
becomes trapped under an adhesion, the intestine may
become partially or completely blocked. The symptoms of intestinal obstruction or SBOs due to adhesions depend on the degree and location of the
obstruction. Partial or off-and-on intestinal obstruction due to adhesions may result in intermittent periods of painful abdominal cramping and other
symptoms, including diarrhea.
Symptoms of significant intestinal obstruction
due to adhesions include:

severe abdominal pain and cramping

nausea and vomiting

abdominal distension (swelling)

constipation and the inability to pass gas

symptoms of dehydration.
Symptoms of dehydration include:

dry mouth and tongue

severe thirst

infrequent urination

dry skin

fast heart rate

low blood pressure.
In about 10% of SBOs, part of the intestine twists
tightly and repeatedly around a band of adhesions,
cutting off the blood supply to the intestine and resulting in strangulation and death of the twisted bowel.
The mortality rate for strangulation of the bowel may
be as high as 37%.
Symptoms of bowel strangulation due to adhesions include:

severe abdominal pain, either cramping or constant
abdominal distension due to the inability to pass
stool and gas

an extremely tender abdomen

signs of systemic (body-wide) illness, including fever,
fast heart rate, and low blood pressure.
When a portion of the obstructed bowel begins to
die from lack of blood flow, fluids and bacteria that
help digest food can leak out of the intestinal wall and
into the abdominal cavity causing peritonitis.
PELVIC ADHESIONS. Pelvic adhesions can interfere
with the functioning of the ovaries and fallopian tubes
and are among the common causes of female infertility. Adhesions on the ovaries or fallopian tubes can
prevent pregnancy by trapping the released egg.
Adhesions resulting from endometriosis can cause pelvic pain, particularly during menstruation, as well as
fertility problems.
Diagnosis
Adhesions are diagnosed based on the symptoms,
surgical history, and a physical examination. The physician examines the abdomen and rectum and performs
a pelvic examination on women. Blood tests and chest
and abdominal x rays are taken. Sometimes exploratory surgery is used to locate the adhesions and
sources of pain.
Abdominal computed axial tomography—a CT
or CAT scan—is the most common diagnostic tool
for SBO and intestinal strangulation due to adhesions.
In this procedure a computer reconstructs a portion
of the abdomen from x-ray scans. Barium contrast
x-ray studies also may be used to locate an obstruction. The ingestion of a barium solution provides better visualization of the abdominal organs. However
sometimes intestinal obstruction or strangulation
cannot be confirmed without abdominal surgery.
Exploratory laparoscopy may be used to detect
either abdominal or pelvic adhesions. This procedure
usually is performed in a hospital under local or general anesthesia. A small incision is made near the naval
and carbon dioxide gas is injected to raise the abdominal wall. A tube called a trocar is inserted into the
abdomen. The laparascope, equipped with a light and
a small video camera, is passed through the trocar
for visualization of the peritoneal cavity and the
abdominal or pelvic organs.
Pelvic adhesions also may be detected by hysteroscopy. In this procedure a uterine endoscope is
inserted through the cervix to visualize the cervix and
uterine cavity. With hysterosalpingography (HSG) a
radiopaque or contrast dye is injected through a catheter in the cervix and x rays are taken of the uterus and
fallopian tubes.
Treatment
Although the symptoms of adhesion disease
sometimes disappear on their own, adhesions are permanent without a surgical procedure called adhesion
lysis to disrupt or remove the tissue.
Abdominal adhesions
Sometimes an adhesion-trapped intestine frees
itself spontaneously. Surgery may be used to reposition the intestine to relieve symptoms. Various other
techniques include using suction to decompress the
intestine; however untreated intestinal adhesions may
lead to bowel obstruction.
Although dilation with an endoscope may be used
to widen the region around an intestinal obstruction to
relieve symptoms, SBOs caused almost always require
immediate surgery. In cases of a partial obstruction or
a complete obstruction without severe symptoms, surgery may be delayed for 12–24 hours so that a dehydrated patient can be treated with intravenous fluids.
A small suction tube may be placed through the nose
into the stomach to remove the stomach contents to
relieve pain and nausea and prevent further bloating.
If an adhesion-related SBO disrupts the blood
supply to part of the intestine, gangrene—tissue
death—can occur. Strangulation of the bowel usually
requires emergency abdominal surgery to remove the
adhesions and restore blood flow to the intestine.
Intestinal obstruction repair is performed under general anesthesia. An incision is made in the abdomen,
the obstruction is located, and the adhesions are cut
away, releasing the intestine. The bowel is examined
for injury or tissue death. If possible, injured and dead
sections are removed and the healthy ends of the intestine are stitched together (resectioned). If resectioning
is not possible, the ends of the intestine are brought
through an opening in the abdomen called an ostomy.
In some cases laparoscopic surgery can be used to
removed damaged portions of the intestines. Five or
six small incisions—0.2–0.4 in. (5–10 mm) in length—
are made in the abdomen. The laparoscope, equipped
with its light and camera, and surgical instruments are
inserted through the incisions. The laparoscope guides
the surgeon by projecting images of the abdominal
organs on a video monitor. However the existence of
multiple adhesions may preclude the use of laparoscopic surgery.
Other types of adhesions
Adhesions caused by endometriosis may be
removed by either traditional open abdominal or pelvic surgery or by laparoscopic surgery. In the latter
technique the laparoscope includes a laser for destroying the tissue with heat. Although untreated gynecological adhesions can lead to infertility, both types of
surgeries also can result in adhesion formation.
ICE-type glaucoma caused by adhesions is difficult to treat; however untreated ICE syndrome can
lead to blindness. Treatment usually includes medication and/or filtering surgery. Filtering microsurgery
involves cutting a tiny hole in the white of the eye
(the sclera) to allow fluid to drain, thereby lowering
the pressure in the eye and preventing or reducing
damage to the optic nerve.
Alternative treatment
In cases where the intestines are partially blocked
by adhesions, a diet low in fiber—called a low-residue
diet—may enable food to move more easily through
the obstruction.
Prognosis
Intestinal obstruction surgery usually has a favorable outcome if the surgery is performed before tissue
damage or death occurs. Surgery to remove adhesions
and to free or reconnect the intestine often is sufficient
for reducing symptoms and returning normal function
to the intestine or other organ. However the risk of
new adhesion formation increases with each additional surgery. Thus abdominal adhesions can become
a recurring problem. Adhesions reform in 11–21% of
patients who have surgery to remove an adhesionrelated intestinal obstruction. The risk of recurrence
is particularly high among survivors of bowel
strangulation.
Prevention
Abdominal and gynecological laparoscopic surgeries—also known as ‘‘keyhole’’ surgeries—reduce
the size of the incision and the amount of contact
with the organs, thereby lowering the risk of adhesion
formation. Sometimes the intestines are fixed in place
during surgery so as to promote benign adhesions that
will not cause obstructions.
Within five days after surgery the disturbed tissue
surfaces have formed a new lining of mesothelial cells
that prevent adhesions from forming. Therefore biodegradable barrier membranes, films, gels, or sprays
can be used to physically separate the tissues after
surgery to prevent the formation of postoperative
adhesions.However these gels and other barrier agents
may:

suppress the immune system

cause infection

impair healing
Systemic anti-inflammatory medications may be
used to help prevent adhesion formation. Recent studies suggest that the common oral arthritis drug,
Celebrex, an anti-inflammatory COX-2 inhibitor,
taken before and immediately after surgery, may
help prevent abdominal adhesions. Celebrex is
known to inhibit both the formation of blood vessels
and fibroblast activity, which are necessary for the
formation of scar tissue.
Recent research has focused on the incorporation
of anti-inflammatory and anti-proliferation drugs into
polymeric films used for preventing and treating postsurgical adhesions. New types of gels to prevent postoperative adhesions also are under development.