Definition
Adrenalectomy is the surgical removal of one or
both of the adrenal glands. The adrenal glands are
paired endocrine glands, one located above each kidney, that produce hormones such as epinephrine, norepinephrine, androgens, estrogens, aldosterone, and
cortisol. Adrenalectomy is usually performed by conventional (open) surgery, but in selected patients surgeons may use laparoscopy. With laparoscopy,
adrenalectomy can be accomplished through four
very small incisions.
Purpose
Adrenalectomy is usually advised for patients
with tumors of the adrenal glands. Adrenal gland
tumors may be malignant or benign, but all typically
excrete excessive amounts of one or more hormones. A
successful procedure will aid in correcting hormone
imbalances, and may also remove cancerous tumors
that can invade other parts of the body. Occasionally,
adrenalectomy may be recommended when hormones
produced by the adrenal glands aggravate another
condition such as breast cancer.
Precautions
The adrenal glands are fed by numerous blood
vessels, so surgeons need to be alert to extensive bleeding during surgery. In addition, the adrenal glands lie
close to one of the body’s major blood vessels (the
vena cava), and to the spleen and the pancreas. The
surgeon needs to remove the gland(s) without damaging any of these important and delicate organs.
Description
Open adrenalectomy
The surgeon may operate from any of four directions, depending on the exact problem and the
patient’s body type.
In the anterior approach, the surgeon cuts into the
abdominal wall. Usually the incision will be horizontal, just under the rib cage. If the surgeon intends to
operate on only one of the adrenal glands, the incision
will run under just the right or the left side of the rib
cage. Sometimes a vertical incision in the middle of the
abdomen provides a better approach, especially if
both adrenal glands are involved.
In the posterior approach, the surgeon cuts into
the back, just beneath the rib cage. If both glands are
to be removed, an incision is made on each side of the
body. This approach is the most direct route to the
adrenal glands, but it does not provide quite as clear a
view of the surrounding structures as the anterior
approach.
In the flank approach, the surgeon cuts into the
patient’s side. This is particularly useful in massively
obese patients. If both glands need to be removed, the
surgeon must remove one gland, repair the surgical
wound, turn the patient onto the other side, and repeat
the entire process.
The last approach involves an incision into the
chest cavity, either with or without part of the incision
into the abdominal cavity. It is used when the surgeon
anticipates a very large tumor, or if the surgeon needs
to examine or remove nearby structures as well.
Laparoscopic adrenalectomy
This technique does not require the surgeon to
open the body cavity. Instead, four small incisions
(about 1/2 in diameter each) are made into a patient’s
flank, just under the rib cage. A laparoscope, which
enables the surgeon to visualize the inside of the
abdominal cavity on a television monitor, is placed
through one of the incisions. The other incisions are
for tubes that carry miniaturized versions of surgical
tools. These tools are designed to be operated by
manipulations that the surgeon makes outside the
body.
Preparation
Most aspects of preparation are the same as in
other major operations. In addition, hormone imbalances are often a major challenge. Whenever possible,
physicians will try to correct hormone imbalances
through medication in the days or weeks before surgery. Adrenal tumors may cause other problems such
as hypertension or inadequate potassium in the blood,
and these problems also should be resolved if possible
before surgery is performed. Therefore, a patient may
take specific medicines for days or weeks before
surgery.
Most adrenal tumors can be imaged very well with
a CT scan or MRI, and benign tumors tend to look
different on these tests than do cancerous tumors.
Surgeons may order a CT scan, MRI, or scintigraphy
(viewing of the location of a tiny amount of radioactive agent) to help locate exactly where the tumor is.
The day before surgery, patients will probably
have an enema to clear the bowels. In patients with
lung problems or clotting problems, physicians may
advise special preparations
Aftercare
Patients stay in the hospital for various lengths of
time after adrenalectomy. The longest hospital stays
are required for open surgery using an anterior
approach; hospital stays of about three days are indicated for open surgery using the posterior approach or
for laparoscopic adrenalectomy.
The special concern after adrenalectomy is the
patient’s hormone balance. There may be several sets
of lab tests to define hormone problems and monitor
the results of drug treatment. In addition, blood pressure problems and infections are more common after
removal of certain types of adrenal tumors.
As with most open surgery, surgeons are also
concerned about blood clots forming in the legs and
traveling to the lungs (venous thromboembolism),
bowel problems, and postoperative pain. With laparoscopic adrenalectomy, these problems are somewhat
less difficult, but they are still present.
Risks
The special risks of adrenalectomy involve major
hormone imbalances, caused by the underlying disease, the surgery, or both.These can include problems
with wound healing itself, blood pressure fluctuations,
and other metabolic problems.
Other risks are typical of many operations.These
include:

bleeding

damage to adjacent organs (spleen, pancreas)

loss of bowel function

blood clots in the lungs

lung problems

surgical infections

pain

extensive scarring