Definition
Adrenoleukodystrophy is a rare genetic disease
characterized by a loss of myelin surrounding nerve
cells in the brain and progressive adrenal gland
dysfunction.
Description
Adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) is a member of a
group of diseases, leukodystrophies, that cause damage
to the myelin sheath of nerve cells. Approximately one
in 100,000 people is affected by ALD. There are three
basic forms of ALD: childhood, adult-onset, and
neonatal. The childhood form of the disease is the
classical form and is the most severe. Childhood
ALD is progressive and usually leads to total disability or death. It affects only boys because the genetic
defect is sex-linked (carried on the X chromosome).
Onset usually occurs between ages four and ten and
can include many different symptoms, not all of
which appear together. The most common symptoms
are behavioral problems and poor memory. Other
symptoms frequently seen are loss of vision, seizures,
poorly articulated speech, difficulty swallowing,
deafness, problems with gait and coordination, fatigue, increased skin pigmentation, and progressive
dementia.
The adult-onset form of the disease, also called
adrenomyeloneuropathy, is milder, progresses slowly,
is usually associated with a normal life span, and
usually appears between ages 21-35. Symptoms may
include progressive stiffness, weakness, or paralysis of
the lower limbs and loss of coordination. Brain function deterioration may also been seen. Women who
are carriers of the disease occasionally experience the
same symptoms, as well as others, including ataxia,
hypertonia (excessive muscle tone), mild peripheral
neuropathy, and urinary problems. The neonatal
form affects both male and female infants and may
produce mental retardation, facial abnormalities, seizures, retinal degeneration, poor muscle tone,
enlarged liver, and adrenal dysfunction. Neonatal
ALD usually progresses rapidly.
Causes and symptoms
The genetic defect in ALD causes a decrease in the
ability to degrade very long chain fatty acids. These
build up in the adrenal glands, brain, plasma, and
fibroblasts. The build-up of very long chain fatty
acids interferes with the ability of the adrenal gland
to convert cholesterol into steroids and causes demyelination of nerves in the white matter of the brain.
Demyelinated nerve cells are unable to function
properly.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is made based on observed symptoms, a
biochemical test, and a family history. The biochemical test detects elevated levels of very long chain fatty
acids in samples from amniocentesis, chorionic villi,
plasma, red blood cells, or fibroblasts. A family history may indicate the likelihood of ALD because the
disease is carried on the X-chromosome by the female
lineage of families.
Treatment
Treatment for all forms of ALD consists of treating the symptoms and supporting the patient with
physical therapy, psychological counseling, and special education in some cases. There is no cure for this
disease, and there are no drugs that can reverse demyelination of nerve and brain cells. Dietary measures
consist of reducing the intake of foods high in fat,
which are a source of very long chain fatty acids. A
mixture called Lorenzo’s Oil has been shown to reduce
the level of long chain fatty acids if used long term;
however, the rate of myelin loss is unaffected.
Experimental bone marrow transplantation has not
been very effective.
Prognosis
Prognosis for childhood and neonatal ALD
patients is poor because of the progressive myelin
degeneration. Death usually occurs between one and
ten years after onset of symptoms.
Prevention
Since ALD is a genetic disease, prevention is largely limited to genetic counseling and fetal monitoring
through amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling.