Definition
Adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), also
called acute respiratory distress syndrome, is a type
of lung (pulmonary) failure that may result from any
disease that causes large amounts of fluid to collect
in the lungs. ARDS is not itself a specific disease, but a
syndrome, a group of symptoms and signs that
make up one of the most important forms of lung or
respiratory failure. It can develop quite suddenly in
persons whose lungs have been perfectly normal.
Very often ARDS is a true medical emergency. The
basic fault is a breakdown of the barrier, or membrane, that normally keeps fluid from leaking out of
the small blood vessels of the lung into the breathing
sacs (the alveoli).
Description
Another name for ARDS is shock lung. Its formal
name is misleading, because children, as well as adults,
may be affected. In the lungs the smallest blood vessels, or capillaries, make contact with the alveoli, tiny
air sacs at the tips of the smallest breathing tubes (the
bronchi). This is the all-important site where oxygen
passes from air that is inhaled to the blood, which
carries it to all parts of the body. Any form of lung
injury that damages this point of contact, called the
alveolo-capillary junction, will allow blood and tissue
fluid to leak into the alveoli, eventually filling them so
that air cannot enter. The result is the type of breathing distress called ARDS. ARDS is one of the major
causes of excess fluid in the lungs, the other being heart
failure.
Along with fluid there is a marked increase in
inflamed cells in the lungs. There also is debris left
over from damaged lung cells, and fibrin, a semisolid material derived from blood in the tissues.
Typically these materials join together with large
molecules in the blood (proteins), to form hyaline
membranes. (These membranes are very prominent
in premature infants who develop respiratory distress
syndrome; it is often called hyaline membrane disease.) If ARDS is very severe or lasts a long time, the
lungs do not heal, but rather become scarred, a process
known as fibrosis. The lack of a normal amount of
oxygen causes the blood vessels of the lung to become
narrower, and in time they, too, may become scarred
and filled with clotted blood. The lungs as a whole
become very ‘‘stiff,’’ and it becomes much harder for
the patient to breathe.
Causes and symptoms
A very wide range of diseases or toxic substances,
including some drugs, can cause ARDS. They include:

Breathing in (aspiration) of the stomach contents
when regurgitated, or salt water or fresh water from
nearly drowning.

Inhaling smoke, as in a fire; toxic materials in the air,
such as ammonia or hydrocarbons; or too much
oxygen, which itself can injure the lungs.

Infection by a virus or bacterium, or sepsis, a widespread infection that gets into the blood.

Massive trauma, with severe injury to any part of the
body.

Shock with persistently low blood pressure may not
in itself cause ARDS, but it can be an important
factor.

A blood clotting disorder called disseminated intravascular coagulation, in which blood clots form in
vessels throughout the body, including the lungs.

A large amount of fat entering the circulation and
traveling to the lungs, where it lodges in small blood
vessels, injuring the cells lining the vessel walls.

An overdose of a narcotic drug, a sedative, or, rarely,
aspirin
Inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis), when
blood proteins, called enzymes, pass to the lungs
and injure lung cells.

Severe burn injury.

Injury of the brain, or bleeding into the brain, from
any cause may be a factor in ARDS for reasons that
are not clear. Convulsions also may cause some
cases.
Usually ARDS develops within one to two days of
the original illness or injury. The person begins to take
rapid but shallow breaths. The doctor who listens to
the patient’s chest with a stethoscope may hear
‘‘crackling’’ or wheezing sounds. The low blood oxygen content may cause the skin to appear mottled or
even blue. As fluid continues to fill the breathing sacs,
the patient may have great trouble breathing, take
very rapid breaths, and gasp for air.
Diagnosis
A simple test using a device applied to the ear will
show whether the blood is carrying too little oxygen,
and this can be confirmed by analyzing blood taken
from an artery. The chest x ray may be normal in the
early stages, but, in a short time, fluid will be seen
where it does not belong. The two lungs are about
equally affected. A heart of normal size indicates that
the problem actually is ARDS and not heart failure.
Another way a physician can distinguish between
these two possibilities is to place a catheter into a
vein and advance it into the main artery of the lung.
In this way, the pressure within the pulmonary capillaries can be measured. Pressure within the pulmonary
capillaries is elevated in heart failure, but normal
in ARDS.
Treatment
The three main goals in treating patients with
ARDS are:

To treat whatever injury or disease has caused
ARDS. Examples are: to treat septic infection with
the proper antibiotics, and to reduce the level of
oxygen therapy if ARDS has resulted from a toxic
level of oxygen.

To control the process in the lungs that allows fluid
to leak out of the blood vessels. At present there
is no certain way to achieve this. Certain steroid
hormones have been tried because they can combat
inflammation, but the actual results have been
disappointing.

To make sure the patient gets enough oxygen until
the lung injury has had time to heal. If oxygen delivered by a face mask is not enough, the patient is
placed on a ventilator, which takes over breathing,
and, through a tube placed in the nose or mouth (or
an incision in the windpipe), forces oxygen into the
lungs. This treatment must be closely supervised, and
the pressure adjusted so that too much oxygen is not
delivered.
Patients with ARDS should be cared for in an
intensive care unit, where experienced staff and all
needed equipment are available. Enough fluid must
be provided, by vein if necessary, to prevent dehydration. Also, the patient’s nutritional state must be maintained, again by vein, if oral intake is not sufficient.
Prognosis
If the patient’s lung injury does not soon begin to
heal, the lack of sufficient oxygen can injure other
organs, such as the kidneys. There always is a risk
that bacterial pneumonia will develop at some point.
Without prompt treatment, as many as 90% of
patients with ARDS can be expected to die. With
modern treatment, however, about half of all patients
will survive. Those who do live usually recover completely, with little or no long-term breathing difficulty.
Lung scarring is a risk after a long period on a ventilator, but it may improve in the months after the
patient is taken off ventilation. Whether a particular
patient will recover depends to a great extent on
whether the primary disease that caused ARDS to
develop in the first place can be effectively treated.
Prevention
The only way to prevent ARDS is to avoid those
diseases and harmful conditions that damage the lung.
For instance, the danger of aspirating stomach contents into the lungs can be avoided by making sure a
patient does not eat shortly before receiving general
anesthesia. If a patient needs oxygen therapy, as low a
level as possible should be given. Any form of lung
infection, or infection anywhere in the body that gets
into the blood, must be treated promptly to avoid the
lung injury that causes ARDS.