Definition
Starting at what is commonly called middle age,
operations of the human body begin to be more vulnerable to daily wear and tear; there is a general
decline in physical, and possibly mental, functioning.
In the Western countries, the length of life is often into
the 70s. The upward limit of the life span, however,
can be as high as 120 years. During the latter half of
life, an individual is more prone to have problems with
the various functions of the body and to develop any
number of chronic or fatal diseases. The cardiovascular, digestive, excretory, nervous, reproductive and
urinary systems are particularly affected. The most
common diseases of aging include Alzheimer’s, arthritis, cancer, diabetes, depression, and heart disease.
Description
Human beings reach a peak of growth and development around the time of their mid 20s. Aging is the
normal transition time after that flurry of activity.
Although there are quite a few age-related changes
that tax the body, disability is not necessarily a part
of aging. Health and lifestyle factors together with
the genetic makeup of the individual, and determines
the response to these changes. Body functions that are
most often affected by age include:

Hearing, which declines especially in relation to the
highest pitched tones.

The proportion of fat to muscle, which may increase
by as much as 30%. Typically, the total padding of
body fat directly under the skin thins out and accumulates around the stomach. The ability to excrete
fats is impaired, and therefore the storage of fats
increases, including cholesterol and fat-soluble
nutrients.

The amount of water in the body decreases, which
therefore decreases the absorption of water-soluble
nutrients. Also, there is less saliva and other lubricating fluids.

The liver and the kidneys cannot function as efficiently, thus affecting the elimination of wastes.

A decrease in the ease of digestion, with a decrease in
stomach acid production.

A loss of muscle strength and coordination, with an
accompanying loss of mobility, agility, and
flexibility.

A decline in sexual hormones and sexual functioning.

A decrease in the sensations of taste and smell.

Changes in the cardiovascular and respiratory systems, leading to decreased oxygen and nutrients
throughout the body.

Decreased functioning of the nervous system so that
nerve impulses are not transmitted as efficiently,
reflexes are not as sharp, and memory and learning
are diminished.

A decrease in bone strength and density.

Hormone levels, which gradually decline. The thyroid and sexual hormones are particularly affected.

Declining visual abilities. Age-related changes may
lead to diseases such as macular degeneration.

A compromised ability to produce vitamin D from
sunlight.

A reduction in protein formation leading to shrinkage in muscle mass and decreased bone formation,
possibly leading to osteoporosis.
Causes and symptoms
There are several theories as to why the aging
body loses functioning. It may be that several factors
work together or that one particular factor is at work
more than others in a given individual.

Programmed senescence, or aging clock, theory. The
aging of the cells of each individual is programmed
into the genes, and there is a preset number of
possible rejuvenations in the life of a given cell. When
cells die at a rate faster than they are replaced, organs
do not function properly, and they are soon unable
to maintain the functions necessary for life.

Genetic theory. Human cells maintain their own seed
of destruction at the level of the chromosomes.

Connective tissue, or cross-linking theory. Changes
in the make-up of the connective tissue alter the
stability of body structures, causing a loss of elasticity and functioning, and leading to symptoms of
aging.

Free-radical theory. The most commonly held theory
of aging, it is based on the fact that ongoing chemical
reactions of the cells produce free radicals. In the
presence of oxygen, these free radicals cause the
cells of the body to break down. As time goes on,
more cells die or lose the ability to function, and the
body soon ceases to function as a whole.

Immunological theory. There are changes in the immune system as it begins to wear out, and the body is
more prone to infections and tissue damage, which
may finally cause death. Also, as the system breaks
down, the body is more apt to have autoimmune
reactions, in which the body’s own cells are mistaken
for foreign material and are destroyed or damaged
by the immune system.
Diagnosis
Many problems can arise due to age-related
changes in the body. Although there is no one test to
be given, a thorough physical exam and a basic blood
screening and blood chemistry panel can point to
areas in need of further attention. When older people
become ill, the first signs of disease are often nonspecific. Further exams should be conducted if any of the
following occur:

diminished or lack of desire for food

increasing confusion

failure to thrive

urinary incontinence

dizziness

weight loss

falling
Treatment
For the most part, doctors prescribe medications
to control the symptoms and diseases of aging. In the
United States, about two-thirds of people 65 and over
take medications for various complaints. More
women than men use these medications. The most
common drugs used by the elderly are painkillers,
diuretics or water pills, sedatives, cardiac drugs, antibiotics, and mental health drugs.
Estrogen replacement therapy (ERT) is commonly prescribed to postmenopausal women for
symptoms of aging. It is often used in conjunction
with progesterone. ERT functions to help keep bones
strong, reduce risk of heart disease, restore vaginal
lubrication, and to improve skin elasticity. Evidence
suggests that it may also help maintain mental
functions.
Expected results
Aging is unavoidable, but major physical impairment is not. People can lead a healthy, disability-free
life well through their later years. A well established
support system of family, friends, and health care
providers, together with focus on good nutrition and
lifestyle habits and good stress management, can
prevent disease and lessen the impact of chronic
conditions.
Alternative treatment
Nutritional supplements
Consumption of a high–quality multivitamin is
recommended. Common nutritional deficiencies connected with aging include B vitamins, vitamins A and
C, folic acid, calcium, magnesium, zinc, iron, chromium, and trace minerals. Since stomach acids may
be decreased, it is suggested that the use of a powdered
multivitamin formula in gelatin capsules be used, as
this form is the easiest to digest. Such formulas may
also contain enzymes for further help with digestion.
Antioxidants can help to neutralize damage by
the free radical actions thought to contribute to problems of aging. They are also helpful in preventing
and treating cancer and in treating cataracts and
glaucoma. Supplements that serve as antioxidants
include:

Vitamin E, 400–1,000 IUs daily. Protects cell membranes against damage. It shows promise in prevention against heart disease, and Alzheimer’s and
Parkinson’s diseases.

Selenium, 50 mg taken twice daily. Research suggests
that selenium may play a role in reducing the risk of
cancer.

Beta-carotene, 25,000–40,000 IUs daily. May help in
treating cancer, colds and flu, arthritis, and immune
support.

Vitamin C, 1,000–2,000 mg per day. It may cause
diarrhea in large doses. If this occurs, however, all
that is needed is a decrease in the dosage.
Other supplements that are helpful in treating agerelated problems including:

B12/B-complex vitamins, studies show that B12 may
help reduce mental symptoms, such as confusion,
memory loss, and depression.

Coenzyme Q10 may be helpful in treating heart disease, as up to three-quarters cardiac patients have
been found to be lacking in this heart enzyme.
Hormones
The following hormone supplements may be
taken to prevent or to treat various age-related problems. However, caution should be taken before
beginning treatment, and the patient should consult
his or her health care professional.
DHEA improves brain functioning and serves as a
building block for many other important hormones in
the body. It may be helpful in restoring declining
hormone levels and in building up muscle mass,
strengthening the bones, and maintaining a healthy
heart.
Melatonin may be helpful for insomnia. It has also
been used to help fight viruses and bacterial infections,
reduce the risk of heart disease, improve sexual functioning, and to protect against cancer.
Human growth hormone (hGH) has been shown
to regulate blood sugar levels and to stimulate bone,
cartilage, and muscle growth while reducing fat.
Herbs
Garlic (Allium sativa) is helpful in preventing
heart disease, as well as improving the tone and texture
of skin. Garlic stimulates liver and digestive system
functions, and also helps in dealing with heart disease
and high blood pressure.
Siberian ginseng (Eleutherococcus senticosus)
supports the adrenal glands and immune functions.
It is believed to be helpful in treating problems related
to stress. Siberian ginseng also increases mental
and physical performance, and may be useful in treating memory loss, chronic fatigue, and immune
dysfunction.
Proanthocyanidins, or PCO, are Pycnogenol,
derived from grape seeds and skin, and from pine
tree bark, and may help in the prevention of cancer
and poor vision.
In Ayurvedic medicine, aging is described as a
process of increased vata, in which there is a tendency
to become thinner, drier, more nervous, more restless,
and more fearful, while having a loss of appetite
as well as sleep. Bananas, almonds, avocados, and
coconuts are some of the foods used in correcting
such conditions. One of the main herbs used for
such conditions is gotu kola (Centella asiatica),
which is used to revitalize the nervous system and
brain cells and to fortify the immune system. Gotu
kola is also used to treat memory loss, anxiety, and
insomnia.
In Chinese medicine, most symptoms of aging are
regarded as symptoms of a yin deficiency. Moistening
foods such as millet, barley soup, tofu, mung beans,
wheat germ, spirulina, potatoes, black sesame seeds,
walnuts, and flax seeds are recommended. Jing tonics
may also be used. These include deer antler, dodder
seeds, processed rehmannia, longevity soup, mussels,
and chicken.
Prevention
Preventive health practices such as healthy diet,
daily exercise, stress management, and control of lifestyle habits such as smoking and drinking, can
lengthen the life span and improve the quality of life
as people age. Exercise can improve the appetite, the
health of the bones, the emotional and mental outlook, and the digestion and circulation.
Drinking plenty of fluids aids in maintaining
healthy skin, good digestion, and proper elimination
of wastes. Up to eight glasses of water should be consumed daily, along with plenty of herbal teas, diluted
fruit and vegetable juices, and fresh fruits and vegetables with high water content.
Because of a decrease in the sense of taste, older
people often increase their intake of salt, which can
contribute to high blood pressure and nutrient loss.
Use of sugar is also increased. Seaweeds and small
amounts of honey can be used as replacements.
Alcohol, nicotine, and caffeine all have potential
damaging effects, and should be limited or completely
eliminated from consumption.
A diet high in fiber and low in fat is recommended.
Processed foods should be replaced by complex carbohydrates, such as whole grains. If chewing becomes
a problem, there should be an increased intake of
protein drinks, freshly juiced fruits and vegetables,
and creamed cereals.