Definition
The word agoraphobia is derived from Greek
words literally meaning ‘‘fear of the marketplace.’’
The term is used to describe an irrational and often
disabling fear of being out in public.
Description
Agoraphobia is just one type of phobia, or irrational fear. People with phobias feel dread or panic
when they face certain objects, situations, or activities.
People with agoraphobia frequently also experience
panic attacks, but panic attacks, or panic disorder,
are not a requirement for a diagnosis of agoraphobia.
The defining feature of agoraphobia is anxiety about
being in places from which escape might be embarrasing or difficult, or in which help might be unavailable.
The person suffering from agoraphobia usually avoids
the anxiety-provoking situation and may become
totally housebound.
Causes and symptoms
Agoraphobia is the most common type of phobia,
and it is estimated to affect between 5-12% of
Americans within their lifetime. Agoraphobia is
twice as common in women as in men and usually
strikes between the ages of 15-35.
The symptoms of the panic attacks which may
accompany agoraphobia vary from person to person,
and may include trembling, sweating, heart palpitations (a feeling of the heart pounding against the
chest), jitters, fatigue, tingling in the hands and feet,
nausea, a rapid pulse or breathing rate, and a sense of
impending doom.
Agoraphobia and other phobias are thought to be
the result of a number of physical and environmental
factors. For instance, they have been associated with
biochemical imbalances, especially related to certain neurotransmitters (chemical nerve messengers) in the brain.
People who have a panic attack in a given situation
(e.g., a shopping mall) may begin to associate the panic
with that situation and learn to avoid it. According to
some theories, irrational anxiety results from unresolved
emotional conflicts. All of these factors may play a
role to varying extents in different cases of agoraphobia.
Diagnosis
People who suffer from panic attacks should discuss the problem with a physician. The doctor can
diagnose the underlying panic or anxiety disorder
and make sure the symptoms aren’t related to some
other underlying medical condition.
The doctor makes the diagnosis of agoraphobia
based primarily on the patient’s description of his or
her symptoms. The person with agoraphobia experiences anxiety in situations where escape is difficult or
help is unavailable–or in certain situations, such as
being alone. While many people are somewhat apprehensive in these situations, the hallmark of agoraphobia is that a person’s active avoidance of the feared
situation impairs his or her ability to work, socialize,
or otherwise function.
Treatment
Treatment for agoraphobia usually consists of
both medication and psychotherapy. Usually,
patients can benefit from certain antidepressants,
such as amitriptyline (Elavil), or selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors, such as paroxetine (Paxil),
fluoxetine (Prozac), or sertraline (Zoloft). In addition, patients may manage panic attacks in progress
with certain tranquilizers called benzodiazepines,
such as alprazolam (Xanax) or clonazepam
(Klonipin).
The mainstay of treatment for agoraphobia and
other phobias is cognitive behavioral therapy. A
specific technique that is often employed is called
desensitization. The patient is gradually exposed to
the situation that usually triggers fear and avoidance,
and, with the help of breathing or relaxation techniques, learns to cope with the situation. This helps
break the mental connection between the situation and
the fear, anxiety, or panic. Patients may also benefit
from psychodynamically oriented psychotherapy,
discussing underlying emotional conflicts with a therapist or support group.
Prognosis
With proper medication and psychotherapy, 90%
of patients will find significant improvement in their
symptoms.