Definition
Acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) is
an infectious disease caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). It was first recognized in the
United States in 1981. AIDS is the advanced form of
infection with the HIV virus, which may not cause
recognizable disease for a long period after the initial
exposure (latency). No vaccine is currently available to
prevent HIV infection. At present, all forms of AIDS
therapy are focused on improving the quality and
length of life for AIDS patients by slowing or halting
the replication of the virus and treating or preventing
infections and cancers that take advantage of a person’s weakened immune system.
Description
AIDS is considered one of the most devastating
public health problems in recent history. In June 2000,
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) reported that 120,223 (includes only those
cases in areas that have confidential HIV reporting)
in the United States are HIV-positive, and 311,701 are
living with AIDS (includes only those cases where vital
status is known). Of these patients, 44% are gay or
bisexual men, 20% are heterosexual intravenous drug
users, and 17% are women. In addition, approximately 1,000-2,000 children are born each year with
HIV infection. The World Health Organization
(WHO) estimates that 33 million adults and 1.3 million children worldwide were living with HIV/AIDS as
of 1999 with 5.4 million being newly infected that year.
Most of these cases are in the developing countries of
Asia and Africa.
Risk factors
AIDS can be transmitted in several ways. The risk
factors for HIV transmission vary according to category:

Sexual contact. Persons at greatest risk are those who
do not practice safe sex, those who are not monogamous, those who participate in anal intercourse, and
those who have sex with a partner with symptoms of
advanced HIV infection and/or other sexually transmitted diseases (STDs). In the United States and
Europe, most cases of sexually transmitted HIV infection have resulted from homosexual contact, whereas
inAfrica, the diseaseis spread primarily through sexual
intercourse among heterosexuals.

Transmission in pregnancy. High-risk mothers
include women married to bisexual men or men
who have an abnormal blood condition called hemophilia and require blood transfusions, intravenous
drug users, and women living in neighborhoods
with a high rate of HIV infection among heterosexuals. The chances of transmitting the disease to the
child are higher in women in advanced stages of the
disease. Breast feeding increases the risk of transmission by 10-20%. The use of zidovudine (AZT) during
pregnancy, however, can decrease the risk of transmission to the baby.

Exposure to contaminated blood or blood products.
With the introduction of blood product screening in
the mid-1980s, the incidence of HIV transmission in
blood transfusions has dropped to onein every 100,000
transfused. With respect to HIV transmission among
drug abusers, risk increases with the duration of using
injections, the frequency of needle sharing, the number of persons who share a needle, and the number of
AIDS cases in the local population.

Needle sticks among health care professionals.
Present studies indicate that the risk of HIV transmission by a needle stick is about one in 250. This
rate can be decreased if the injured worker is given
AZT, an anti-retroviral medication, in combination
with other medication.
HIV is not transmitted by handshakes or other
casual non-sexual contact, coughing or sneezing, or by
bloodsucking insects such as mosquitoes.
AIDS in women
AIDS in women is a serious public health concern.
Women exposed to HIV infection through heterosexual contact are the most rapidly growing risk
group in the United States population. The percentage
of AIDS cases diagnosed in women has risen from 7%
in 1985 to 23% in 1999. Women diagnosed with AIDS
may not live as long as men, although the reasons for
this finding are unclear.
AIDS in children
Since AIDS can be transmitted from an infected
mother to the child during pregnancy, during the birth
process, or through breast milk, all infants born to
HIV-positive mothers are a high-risk group. As of
2000, it was estimated that 87% of HIV-positive
women are of childbearing age; 41% of them are
drug abusers. Between 15-30% of children born to
HIV-positive women will be infected with the virus.
AIDS is one of the 10 leading causes of death in
children between one and four years of age. The interval between exposure to HIV and the development of
AIDS is shorter in children than in adults. Infants
infected with HIV have a 20-30% chance of developing AIDS within a year and dying before age three. In
the remainder, AIDS progresses more slowly; the
average child patient survives to seven years of age.
Some survive into early adolescence.
Causes and symptoms
Because HIV destroys immune system cells, AIDS
is a disease that can affect any of the body’s major
organ systems. HIV attacks the body through three
disease processes: immunodeficiency, autoimmunity,
and nervous system dysfunction.
ich the body’s immune response is damaged, weakened, or is not functioning properly. In AIDS, immunodeficiency results from the way that the virus binds
to a protein called CD4, which is primarily found on
the surface of certain subtypes of white blood cells
called helper T cells or CD4 cells. After the virus has
attached to the CD4 receptor, the virus-CD4 complex
refolds to uncover another receptor called a chemokine receptor that helps to mediate entry of the virus
into the cell. One chemokine receptor in particular,
CCR5, has gotten recent attention after studies
showed that defects in its structure (caused by genetic
mutations) cause the progression of AIDS to be prevented or slowed. Scientists hope that this discovery
will lead to the development of drugs that trigger an
artificial mutation of the CCR5 gene or target the
CCR5 receptor.
Once HIV has entered the cell, it can replicate
intracellularly and kill the cell in ways that are still
not completely understood. In addition to killing some
lymphocytes directly, the AIDS virus disrupts the
functioning of the remaining CD4 cells. Because the
immune system cells are destroyed, many different
types of infections and cancers that take advantage
of a person’s weakened immune system (opportunistic) can develop.
Autoimmunity is a condition in which the body’s
immune system produces antibodies that work against
its own cells. Antibodies are specific proteins produced in response to exposure to a specific, usually
foreign, protein or particle called an antigen. In this
case, the body produces antibodies that bind to blood
platelets that are necessary for proper blood clotting
and tissue repair. Once bound, the antibodies mark the
platelets for removal from the body, and they are
filtered out by the spleen. Some AIDS patients develop
a disorder, called immune-related thrombocytopenia
purpura (ITP), in which the number of blood platelets
drops to abnormally low levels.
Researchers do not know precisely how HIV
attacks the nervous system since the virus can cause
damage without infecting nerve cells directly. One
theory is that, once infected with HIV, one type of
immune system cell, called a macrophage, begins to
release a toxin that harms the nervous system.
The course of AIDS generally progresses through
three stages, although not all patients will follow this
progression precisely:
Acute retroviral syndrome
Acute retroviral syndrome is a term used to
describe a group of symptoms that can resemble
mononucleosis and that may be the first sign of HIV
infection in 50-70% of all patients and 45-90% of
women. Most patients are not recognized as infected
during this phase and may not seek medical attention.
The symptoms may include fever, fatigue, muscle
aches, loss of appetite, digestive disturbances, weight
loss, skin rashes, headache, and chronically swollen
lymph nodes (lymphadenopathy). Approximately 25-
33% of patients will experience a form of meningitis
during this phase in which the membranes that cover
the brain and spinal cord become inflamed. Acute
retroviral syndrome develops between one and six
weeks after infection and lasts for two to three
weeks. Blood tests during this period will indicate the
presence of virus (viremia) and the appearance of the
viral p24 antigen in the blood.
Latency period
After the HIV virus enters a patient’s lymph nodes
during the acute retroviral syndrome stage, the disease
becomes latent for as many as 10 years or more before
symptoms of advanced disease develop. During
latency, the virus continues to replicate in the lymph
nodes, where it may cause one or more of the following
conditions:
PERSISTENT GENERALIZED LYMPHADENOPATHY
(PGL). Persistent generalized lymphadenopathy, or
PGL, is a condition in which HIV continues to produce chronic painless swellings in the lymph nodes
during the latency period. The lymph nodes that are
most frequently affected by PGL are those in the areas
of the neck, jaw, groin, and armpits. PGL affects
between 50-70% of patients during latency.
CONSTITUTIONAL SYMPTOMS. Many patients will
develop low-grade fevers, chronic fatigue, and general
weakness. HIV may also cause a combination of food
malabsorption, loss of appetite, and increased metabolism that contribute to the so-called AIDS wasting
or wasting syndrome.
OTHER ORGAN SYSTEMS. At any time during the
course of HIV infection, patients may suffer from a
yeast infection in the mouth called thrush, open sores
or ulcers, or other infections of the mouth; diarrhea
and other gastrointestinal symptoms that cause malnutrition and weight loss; diseases of the lungs and
kidneys; and degeneration of the nerve fibers in the
arms and legs. HIV infection of the nervous system
leads to general loss of strength, loss of reflexes, and
feelings of numbness or burning sensations in the feet
or lower legs.
Late-stage disease (AIDS)
AIDS is usually marked by a very low number of
CD4+ lymphocytes, followed by a rise in the frequency of opportunistic infections and cancers.
Doctors monitor the number and proportion of
CD4+ lymphocytes in the patient’s blood in order to
assess the progression of the disease and the effectiveness of different medications. About 10% of infected
individuals never progress to this overt stage of the
disease and are referred to as nonprogressors.
OPPORTUNISTIC INFECTIONS. Once the patient’s
CD4+ lymphocyte count falls below 200 cells/mm 3
,
he or she is at risk for a variety of opportunistic infections. The infectious organisms may include the
following:

Fungi. The most common fungal disease associated
with AIDS is Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP).
PCP is the immediate cause of death in 15-20% of
AIDS patients. It is an important measure of a
patient’s prognosis. Other fungal infections include
a yeast infection of the mouth (candidiasis or thrush)
and cryptococcal meningitis.

Protozoa. Toxoplasmosis is a common opportunistic
infection in AIDS patients that is caused by a protozoan. Other diseases in this category include isoporiasis and cryptosporidiosis.

Mycobacteria. AIDS patients may develop tuberculosis or MAC infections. MAC infections are caused
by Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare, and occur in
about 40% of AIDS patients. It is rare until CD4+
counts falls below 50 cells/mm3
.

Bacteria. AIDS patients are likely to develop bacterial infections of the skin and digestive tract.

Viruses. AIDS patients are highly vulnerable to cytomegalovirus (CMV), herpes simplex virus (HSV),
varicella zoster virus (VZV), and Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV) infections. Another virus, JC virus, causes
progressive destruction of brain tissue in the brain
stem, cerebrum, and cerebellum (multifocal leukoencephalopathy or PML), which is regarded as an
AIDS-defining illness by the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention.
AIDS DEMENTIA COMPLEX AND NEUROLOGIC COMPLICATIONS. AIDS dementia complex is usually
a late complication of the disease. It is unclear whether
it is caused by the direct effects of the virus on the
brain or by intermediate causes. AIDS dementia complex is marked by loss of reasoning ability, loss of
memory, inability to concentrate, apathy and loss of
initiative, and unsteadiness or weakness in walking.
Some patients also develop seizures. There are no
specific treatments for AIDS dementia complex.
MUSCULOSKELETAL COMPLICATIONS. Patients in
late-stage AIDS may develop inflammations of the
muscles, particularly in the hip area, and may have
arthritis-like pains in the joints.
ORAL SYMPTOMS. In addition to thrush and painful ulcers in the mouth, patients may develop a condition called hairy leukoplakia of the tongue. This
condition is also regarded by the CDC as an indicator
of AIDS. Hairy leukoplakia is a white area of diseased
tissue on the tongue that may be flat or slightly raised.
It is caused by the Epstein-Barr virus.
AIDS-RELATED CANCERS. Patients with late-stage
AIDS may develop Kaposi’s sarcoma (KS), a skin
tumor that primarily affects homosexual men. KS is
the most common AIDS-related malignancy. It is
characterized by reddish-purple blotches or patches
(brownish in African-Americans) on the skin or in
the mouth. About 40% of patients with KS develop
symptoms in the digestive tract or lungs. KS may be
caused by a herpes virus-like sexually transmitted disease agent rather than HIV.
The second most common form of cancer in AIDS
patients is a tumor of the lymphatic system (lymphoma). AIDS-related lymphomas often affect the
central nervous system and develop very aggressively.
Invasive cancer of the cervix (related to certain
types of human papilloma virus [HPV]) is an important diagnostic marker of AIDS in women.
While incidence of AIDS-defining cancers such as
Kaposi’s sarcoma and cervical cancer have decreased
since increase use of antiretroviral therapy, other cancers has increased in AIDS patients. People with HIV
has shown higher incidence of lung cancer, head and
neck cancers, Hodgkin’s lymphoma, melanoma, and
anorectal cancer from 1992 to 2002.
Diagnosis
Because HIV infection produces such a wide
range of symptoms, the CDC has drawn up a list
of 34 conditions regarded as defining AIDS. The
physician will use the CDC list to decide whether the
patient falls into one of these three groups:

definitive diagnoses with or without laboratory evidence of HIV infection

definitive diagnoses with laboratory evidence of HIV
infection

presumptive diagnoses with laboratory evidence of
HIV infection.
Physical findings
Almost all the symptoms of AIDS can occur with
other diseases. The general physical examination may
range from normal findings to symptoms that are
closely associated with AIDS. These symptoms are
hairy leukoplakia of the tongue and Kaposi’s sarcoma. When the doctor examines the patient, he or
she will look for the overall pattern of symptoms
rather than any one finding.
Laboratory tests for HIV infection
BLOOD TESTS (SEROLOGY). The first blood test
for AIDS was developed in 1985. At present, patients
who are being tested for HIV infection are usually
given an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) test for the presence of HIV antibody in
their blood. Positive ELISA results are then tested
with a Western blot or immunofluorescence (IFA)
assay for confirmation. The combination of the
ELISA and Western blot tests is more than 99.9%
accurate in detecting HIV infection within four to
eight weeks following exposure. The polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) test can be used to detect the
presence of viral nucleic acids in the very small number
of HIV patients who have false-negative results on the
ELISA and Western blot tests. These tests are also
used to detect viruses and bacterium other than HIV
and AIDS.
OTHER LABORATORY TESTS. In addition to diagnostic blood tests, there are other blood tests that are
used to track the course of AIDS in patients that have
already been diagnosed. These include blood counts,
viral load tests, p24 antigen assays, and measurements
of  2-microglobulin ( 2M).
Doctors will use a wide variety of tests to diagnose
the presence of opportunistic infections, cancers, or
other disease conditions in AIDS patients. Tissue
biopsies, samples of cerebrospinal fluid, and sophisticated imaging techniques, such as magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) and computed tomography scans (CT)
are used to diagnose AIDS-related cancers, some
opportunistic infections, damage to the central
nervous system, and wasting of the muscles. Urine and
stool samples are used to diagnose infections caused
by parasites. AIDS patients are also given blood tests
for syphilis and other sexually transmitted diseases.
Diagnosis in children
Diagnostic blood testing in children older than 18
months is similar to adult testing, with ELISA screening confirmed by Western blot. Younger infants can
be diagnosed by direct culture of the HIV virus, PCR
testing, and p24 antigen testing.
In terms of symptoms, children are less likely than
adults to have an early acute syndrome. They are,
however, likely to have delayed growth, a history of
frequent illness, recurrent ear infections, a low blood
cell count, failure to gain weight, and unexplained
fevers. Children with AIDS are more likely to develop
bacterial infections, inflammation of the lungs, and
AIDS-related brain disorders than are HIV-positive
adults.
Treatment
Treatment for AIDS covers four considerations:
TREATMENT OF OPPORTUNISTIC INFECTIONS AND MALIGNANCIES. Most AIDS patients require complex
long-term treatment with medications for infectious
diseases. This treatment is often complicated by the
development of resistance in the disease organisms.
AIDS-related malignancies in the central nervous system are usually treated with radiation therapy.
Cancers elsewhere in the body are treated with
chemotherapy.
PROPHYLACTIC TREATMENT FOR OPPORTUNISTIC INFECTIONS. Prophylactic treatment is treatment that
is given to prevent disease. AIDS patients with a history of Pneumocystis pneumonia; with CD4+ counts
below 200 cells/mm3 or 14% of lymphocytes; weight
loss; or thrush should be given prophylactic medications. The three drugs given are trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole, dapsone, or pentamidine in aerosol
form.
ANTI-RETROVIRAL TREATMENT. In recent years
researchers have developed drugs that suppress HIV
replication, as distinct from treating its effects on the
body. These drugs fall into four classes:

Nucleotide analogues. These drugs work by interfering with the action of HIV reverse transcriptase
inside infected cells, thus ending the virus’ replication
process. These drugs include zidovudine (sometimes
called azidothymidine or AZT), didanosine (ddI),
zalcitabine (ddC), stavudine (d4T), lamivudine
(3TC), and abacavir (ABC).

Protease inhibitors. Protease inhibitors can be effective against HIV strains that have developed resistance to nucleoside analogues, and are often used in
combination with them. These compounds include
saquinavir, ritonavir, indinavir, nelfinavir, amprenavir, and lopinavir..

Non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors. This
is a new class of antiretroviral agents. Three are
available, nevirapine, which was approved first, delavirdine and efavirin.

Fusion inhibitors, the newest class of antiretrovirals.
They block specific proteins on the surface of the
virus or the CD4 cell. These proteins help the virus
gain entry into the cell.The only FDA approved
fusion inhibitor as of spring 2004 was enfuvirtide.
Treatment guidelines for these agents are in constant change as new medications are developed and
introduced. Two principles currently guide doctors in
working out drug regimens for AIDS patients: using
combinations of drugs rather than one medication
alone; and basing treatment decisions on the results
of the patient’s viral load tests.
STIMULATION OF BLOOD CELL PRODUCTION.
Because many patients with AIDS suffer from abnormally low levels of both red and white blood cells,
they may be given medications to stimulate blood cell
production. Epoetin alfa (erythropoietin) may be
given to anemic patients. Patients with low white
blood cell counts may be given filgrastim or
sargramostim.
Treatment in women
Treatment of pregnant women with HIV is particularly important in that anti-retroviral therapy
has been shown to reduce transmission to the infant
by 65%.
Alternative treatment
Alternative treatments for AIDS can be grouped
into two categories: those intended to help the immune
system and those aimed at pain control. Treatments
that may enhance the function of the immune system
include Chinese herbal medicine and western herbal
medicine, macrobiotic and other special diets, guided
imagery and creative visualization, homeopathy, and
vitamin therapy. Pain control therapies include hydrotherapy, reiki, acupuncture, meditation, chiropractic
treatments, and therapeutic massage. Alternative
therapies can also be used to help with side effects of
the medications used in the treatment of AIDS.
Prognosis
At the present time, there is no cure for AIDS.
Treatment stresses aggressive combination drug
therapy for those patients with access to the expensive medications and who tolerate them adequately.
The use of these multi-drug therapies has significantly reduced the numbers of deaths, in this country,
resulting from AIDS. The data is still inconclusive,
but the potential exists to possibly prolong life
indefinitely using these and other drug therapies to
boost the immune system, keep the virus from replicating, and ward off opportunistic infections and
malignancies.
Prognosis after the latency period depends on the
patient’s specific symptoms and the organ systems
affected by the disease. Patients with AIDS-related
lymphomas of the central nervous system die within
two to three months of diagnosis; those with systemic
lymphomas may survive for eight to ten months.
Prevention
As of 2005, there was no vaccine effective against AIDS. Several vaccines are currently being investigated, however, both to prevent initial HIV infection
and as a therapeutic treatment to prevent HIV from
progressing to full-blown AIDS.
In the meantime, there are many things that can
be done to prevent the spread of AIDS:

Being monogamous and practice safe sex.
Individuals must be instructed in the proper use of
condoms and urged to practice safe sex. Besides
avoiding the risk of HIV infection, condoms are
successful in preventing other sexually transmitted
diseases and unwanted pregnancies. Before engaging
in a sexual relationship with someone, getting tested
for HIV infection is recommended.

Avoiding needle sharing among intravenous drug
users.

Although blood and blood products are carefully
monitored, those individuals who are planning to
undergo major surgery may wish to donate blood
ahead of time to prevent a risk of infection from a
blood transfusion.

Healthcare professionals must take all necessary precautions by wearing gloves and masks when handling body fluids and preventing needle-stick injuries.

If someone suspects HIV infection, he or she
should be tested for HIV. If treated aggressively
and early, the development of AIDS may be postponed indefinitely. If HIV infection is confirmed, it
is also vital to let sexual partners know so that they
can be tested and, if necessary, receive medical
attention.