Definition
Albinism is an inherited condition present at
birth, characterized by a lack of pigment that normally
gives color to the skin, hair, and eyes. Many types of
albinism exist, all of which involve lack of pigment in
varying degrees. The condition, which is found in all
races, may be accompanied by eye problems and may
lead to skin cancer later in life.
Description
Albinism is a rare disorder found in fewer than
five people per 100,000 in the United States and
Europe. Other parts of the world have a much higher
rate; for example, albinism is found in about 20 out of
every 100,000 people in southern Nigeria.
There are 10 types of the most common form of the
condition, known as ‘‘oculocutaneous albinism,’’ which
affects the eyes, hair, and skin. In its most severe form,
hair and skin remain pure white throughout life. People
with a less severe form are born with white hair and skin,
which turn slightly darker as they age. Everyone with
oculocutaneous albinism experiences abnormal flickering eye movements (nystagmus) and sensitivity to bright
light. There may be other eye problems as well, including poor vision and crossed or ‘‘lazy’’ eyes (strabismus).
The second most common type of the condition is
known as ‘‘ocular’’ albinism, in which only the eyes
lack color; skin and hair are normal. There are five
forms of ocular albinism; some types cause more problems–especially eye problems–than others.
Causes and symptoms
Every cell in the body contains a matched pair of
genes, one inherited from each parent. These genes act
as a sort of ‘‘blueprint’’ that guides the development of
a fetus.
Albinism is an inherited problem caused by a flaw
in one or more of the genes that are responsible for
directing the eyes and skin to make melanin (pigment).
As a result, little or no pigment is made, and the child’s
skin, eyes and hair may be colorless.
In most types of albinism, a recessive trait, the
child inherits flawed genes for making melanin from
both parents. Because the task of making melanin is
complex, there are many different types of albinism,
involving a number of different genes.
It’s also possible to inherit one normal gene and
one albinism gene. In this case, the one normal gene
provides enough information in its cellular blueprint
to make some pigment, and the child will have normal
skin and eye color. They ‘‘carry’’ one gene for albinism. About one in 70 people are albinism carriers, with
one flawed gene but no symptoms; they have a 50%
chance of passing the albinism gene to their child.
However, if both parents are carriers with one flawed
gene each, they have a 1 in 4 chance of passing on both
copies of the flawed gene to the child, who will have
albinism. (There is also a type of ocular albinism that
is carried on the X chromosome and occurs almost
exclusively in males because they have only one X
chromosome and, therefore, no other gene for the trait
to override the flawed one.)
Symptoms of albinism can involve the skin, hair,
and eyes. The skin, because it contains little pigment,
appears very light, as does the hair.
Although people with albinism may experience a
variety of eye problems, one of the myths about albinism is that it causes people to have pink or red eyes. In
fact, people with albinism can have irises varying from
light gray or blue to brown. (The iris is the colored
portion of the eye that controls the size of the pupil,
the opening that lets light into the eye.) If people with
albinism seem to have reddish eyes, it’s because light is
being reflected from the back of the eye (retina) in
much the same way as happens when people are
photographed with an electronic flash.
People with albinism may have one or more of the
following eye problems:

They may be very far-sighted or near-sighted, and
may have other defects in the curvature of the lens of
the eye (astigmatism) that cause images to appear
unfocused.

They may have a constant, involuntary movement of
the eyeball called nystagmus.

They may have problems in coordinating the eyes in
fixing and tracking objects (strabismus), which may
lead to an appearance of having ‘‘crossed eyes’’ at
times. Strabismus may cause some problems with
depth perception, especially at close distances.

They may be very sensitive to light (photophobia)
because their irises allow ‘‘stray’’ light to enter their
eyes. It’s a common misconception that people with
albinism shouldn’t go out on sunny days, but wearing sunglasses can make it possible to go outside
quite comfortably.
In addition to the characteristically light skin and
eye problems, people with a rare form of albinism
called Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome (HPS) also
have a greater tendency to have bleeding disorders,
inflammation of the large bowel (colitis), lung (pulmonary) disease, and kidney (renal) problems.
Diagnosis
It’s not always easy to diagnose the exact type
of albinism a person has; there are two tests available that can identify only two types of the condition. Recently, a blood test has been developed that
can identify carriers of the gene for some types of
albinism; a similar test during amniocentesis can
diagnose some types of albinism in an unborn
child. A chorionic villus sampling test during the fifth
week of pregnancy may also reveal some types of
albinism.
The specific type of albinism a person has can be
determined by taking a good family history and examining the patient and several close relatives.
The ‘‘hairbulb pigmentation test’’ is used to identify carriers by incubating a piece of the person’s hair
in a solution of tyrosine, a substance in food which the
body uses to make melanin. If the hair turns dark, it
means the hair is making melanin (a ‘‘positive’’ test);
light hair means there is no melanin. This test is the
source of the names of two types of albinism: ‘‘ty-pos’’
and ‘‘ty-neg.’’
The tyrosinase test is more precise than the
hairbulb pigmentation test. It measures the rate at
which hair converts tyrosine into another chemical
(DOPA), which is then made into pigment. The hair
converts tyrosine with the help of a substance called
‘‘tyrosinase.’’ In some types of albinism, tyrosinase
doesn’t do its job, and melanin production breaks
down.
Treatment
There is no treatment that can replace the lack of
melanin that causes the symptoms of albinism.
Doctors can only treat, not cure, the eye problems
that often accompany the lack of skin color. Glasses
are usually needed and can be tinted to ease pain from
too much sunlight. There is no cure for involuntary
eye movements (nystagmus), and treatments for
focusing problems (surgery or contact lenses) are not
effective in all cases.
Crossed eyes (strabismus) can be treated during
infancy, using eye patches, surgery or medicine injections. Treatment may improve the appearance of the
eye, but it can do nothing to cure the underlying
condition.
Patients with albinism should avoid excessive
exposure to the sun, especially between 10 a.m. and
2 p.m. If exposure can’t be avoided, they should use
UVA-UVB sunblocks with an SPF of at least 20.
Taking beta- carotene may help provide some skin
color, although it doesn’t protect against sun
exposure.
Prognosis
In the United States, people with this condition
can expect to have a normal lifespan. People with
albinism may experience some social problems
because of a lack of understanding on the part of
others. When a member of a normally dark-skinned
ethnic group has albinism, he or she may face some
very complex social challenges.
One of the greatest health hazards for people with
albinism is excessive exposure to sun without protection, which could lead to skin cancer. Wearing opaque
clothes and sunscreen rated SPF 20, people with albinism can safely work and play outdoors safely even
during the summer.
Prevention
Genetic counseling is very important to prevent
further occurrences of the conditon.