Definition
Alcoholism is the popular term for alcohol abuse
and alcohol dependence. These disorders involve
repeated life problems that can be directly attributed
to the use of alcohol. Both disorders can have serious
consequences, affecting an individual’s health and personal life, as well as having an impact on society at large.
Description
The effects of alcoholism are far reaching.
Alcohol affects every body system, causing a wide
range of health problems. Problems include poor
nutrition, memory disorders, difficulty with balance
and walking, liver disease (including cirrhosis and
hepatitis), high blood pressure, muscle weakness
(including the heart), heart rhythm disturbances,
anemia, clotting disorders, decreased immunity to
infections, gastrointestinal inflammation and irritation, acute and chronic problems with the pancreas,
low blood sugar, high blood fat content, interference
with reproductive fertility, and weakened bones.
On a personal level, alcoholism results in marital
and other relationship difficulties, depression, unemployment, child abuse, and general family dysfunction.
Alcoholism causes or contributes to a variety of
severe social problems including homelessness, murder, suicide, injury, and violent crime. Alcohol is a
contributing factor in at least 50% of all deaths from
motor vehicle accidents. In fact, about 100,000 deaths
occur each year due to the effects of alcohol, of which
50% are due to injuries of some sort. According to a
special report prepared for the U.S. Congress by the
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism,
the impact of alcohol on society, including violence,
traffic accidents, lost work productivity, and premature death, costs our nation an estimated $185 billion
annually. In addition, it is estimated that approximately one in four children (19 million children or
29% of children up to 17 years of age) is exposed at
some time to familial alcohol abuse, alcohol dependence, or both. Furthermore, it has been estimated
that approximately 18% of adults experience an
episode of alcohol abuse or dependence a some time
during their lives.
Causes and symptoms
There are probably a number of factors that work
together to cause a person to become an alcoholic.
Recent genetic studies have demonstrated that close
relatives of an alcoholic are four times more likely to
become alcoholics themselves. Furthermore, this risk
holds true even for children who were adopted away
from their biological families at birth and raised in a
non-alcoholic adoptive family, with no knowledge of
their biological family’s difficulties with alcohol. More
research is being conducted to determine if genetic
factors could account for differences in alcohol metabolism that may increase the risk of an individual
becoming an alcoholic.
The symptoms of alcoholism can be broken down
into two major categories: symptoms of acute alcohol
use and symptoms of long-term alcohol use.
Immediate (acute) effects of alcohol use
Alcohol exerts a depressive effect on the brain. The
blood-brain barrier does not prevent alcohol from
entering the brain, so the brain alcohol level will quickly
become equivalent to the blood alcohol level. Alcohol’s
depressive effects result in difficulty walking, poor balance, slurring of speech, and generally poor coordination (accounting in part for the increased likelihood of
injury). The affected person also may have impairment
of peripheral vision. At higher alcohol levels, a person’s
breathing and heart rates will be slowed, and vomiting
may occur (with a high risk of the vomit being breathed
into the lungs, resulting in severe problems, including
the possibility of pneumonia). Still higher alcohol levels
may result in coma and death.
Effects of long-term (chronic) alcoholism
Long-term use of alcohol affects virtually every
organ system of the body
Nervous system. An estimated 30-40% of all men in
their teens and twenties have experienced alcoholic
blackout, which occurs when drinking a large quantity of alcohol results in the loss of memory of the
time surrounding the episode of drinking. Alcohol is
well-known to cause sleep disturbances, so that overall sleep quality is affected. Numbness and tingling
may occur in the arms and legs. Two syndromes,
which can occur together or separately, are known
as Wernicke’s and Korsakoff’s syndromes. Both are
due to the low thiamine (a form of vitamin B
complex) levels found in alcoholics. Wernicke’s
syndrome results in disordered eye movements, very
poor balance and difficulty walking, while
Korsakoff’s syndrome severely affects one’s memory,
preventing new learning from taking place.

Gastrointestinal system. Alcohol causes loosening of
the muscular ring that prevents the stomach’s contents from re-entering the esophagus. Therefore, the
acid from the stomach flows backward into the esophagus, burning those tissues, and causing pain and
bleeding. Inflammation of the stomach also can
result in bleeding and pain, and decreased desire to
eat. A major cause of severe, uncontrollable bleeding
(hemorrhage) in an alcoholic is the development
of enlarged (dilated) blood vessels within the
esophagus, which are called esophageal varices.
These varices actually are developed in response to
liver disease, and are extremely prone to bursting and
hemorrhaging. Diarrhea is a common symptom, due
to alcohol’s effect on the pancreas. In addition,
inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis) is a serious and painful problem in alcoholics. Throughout
the intestinal tract, alcohol interferes with the
absorption of nutrients, creating a malnourished
state. Because alcohol is broken down (metabolized)
within the liver, the organ is severely affected by
constant levels of alcohol. Alcohol interferes with a
number of important chemical processes that also
occur in the liver. The liver begins to enlarge and fill
with fat (fatty liver), fibrous scar tissue interferes with
the liver’s normal structure and function (cirrhosis),
and the liver may become inflamed (hepatitis).

Blood. Alcohol can cause changes to all the types of
blood cells. Red blood cells become abnormally
large. White blood cells (important for fighting infections) decrease in number, resulting in a weakened
immune system. This places alcoholics at increased
risk for infections, and is thought to account in part
for the increased risk of cancer faced by alcoholics
(10 times the risk for nonalcoholics). Platelets and
blood clotting factors are affected, causing an
increased risk of bleeding.

Heart. Small amounts of alcohol cause a drop in
blood pressure, but with increased use, alcohol
begins to increase blood pressure into a dangerous
range. High levels of fats circulating in the bloodstream increase the risk of heart disease. Heavy
drinking results in an increase in heart size, weakening of the heart muscle, abnormal heart rhythms, a
risk of blood clots forming within the chambers of the
heart, and a greatly increased risk of stroke (due to a
blood clot from the heart entering the circulatory
system, going to the brain, and blocking a brain
blood vessel).

Reproductive system. Heavy drinking has a negative
effect on fertility in both men and women, by
decreasing testicle and ovary size, and interfering
with both sperm and egg production. When pregnancy is achieved in an alcoholic woman, the baby
has a great risk of being born with fetal alcohol
syndrome, which causes distinctive facial defects,
lowered IQ, and behavioral problems.
Diagnosis
Two different types of alcohol-related difficulties
have been identified. The first is called alcohol dependence, which refers to a person who literally depends
on the use of alcohol. Three of the following traits
must be present to diagnose alcohol dependence:

tolerance, meaning that a person becomes accustomed to a particular dose of alcohol, and must
increase the dose in order to obtain the desired effect

withdrawal, meaning that a person experiences
unpleasant physical and psychological symptoms
when he or she does not drink alcohol

the tendency to drink more alcohol than one intends
(once an alcoholic starts to drink, he or she finds it
difficult to stop)

being unable to avoid drinking or stop drinking once
started

having large blocks of time taken up by alcohol use

choosing to drink at the expense of other important
tasks or activities

drinking despite evidence of negative effects on one’s
health, relationships, education, or job
Diagnosis is sometimes brought about when
family members call an alcoholic’s difficulties to the
attention of a physician. A clinician may begin to be
suspicious when a patient suffers repeated injuries or
begins to experience medical problems related to
the use of alcohol. In fact, some estimates suggest
that about 20% of a physician’s patients will be
alcoholics.
Diagnosis is aided by administering specific psychological assessments that try to determine what
aspects of a person’s life may be affected by his or
her use of alcohol. Determining the exact quantity of
alcohol that a person drinks is of much less importance than determining how his or her drinking affects
relationships, jobs, educational goals, and family life.
In fact, because the metabolism (how the body breaks
down and processes) of alcohol is so individual, the
quantity of alcohol consumed is not part of the criteria
list for diagnosing either alcohol dependence or alcohol abuse.
One simple tool for beginning the diagnosis of
alcoholism is called the CAGE questionnaire. It consists of four questions, with the first letters of each key
word spelling out the word CAGE:

Have you ever tried to Cut down on your drinking?

Have you ever been Annoyed by anyone’s comments
about your drinking?

Have you ever felt Guilty about your drinking?

Do you ever need an Eye-opener (a morning drink of
alcohol) to start the day)?
Other, longer lists of questions exist to help determine the severity and effects of a person’s alcohol use.
Given the recent research pointing to a genetic basis
for alcoholism, it is important to ascertain whether
anyone else in the person’s family has ever suffered
from alcoholism.
Treatment
Treatment of alcoholism has two parts. The first
step in the treatment of alcoholism, called detoxification, involves helping the person stop drinking and
ridding his or her body of the harmful (toxic) effects
of alcohol. Because the person’s body has become
accustomed to alcohol, the person will need to be
supported through withdrawal. Withdrawal will be
different for different patients, depending on the severity of the alcoholism, as measured by the quantity of
alcohol ingested daily and the length of time the
patient has been an alcoholic. Withdrawal symptoms
can range from mild to life-threatening. Mild withdrawal symptoms include nausea, achiness, diarrhea,
difficulty sleeping, sweatiness, anxiety, and trembling.
This phase is usually over in about three to five days.
More severe effects of withdrawal can include hallucinations (in which a patient sees, hears, or feels something that is not actually real), seizures, an unbearable
craving for more alcohol, confusion, fever, fast heart
rate, high blood pressure, and delirium (a fluctuating
level of consciousness). Patients at highest risk for the
most severe symptoms of withdrawal (referred to as
delirium tremens) are those with other medical
problems, including malnutrition, liver disease, or
Wernicke’s syndrome. Delirium tremens usually
begin about three to five days after the patient’s last
drink, progressing from the more mild symptoms to
the more severe, and may last a number of days.
Patients going through only mild withdrawal are
simply monitored carefully to make sure that more
severe symptoms do not develop. No medications are
necessary, however. Treatment of a patient suffering
the more severe effects of withdrawal may require the
use of sedative medications to relieve the discomfort of
withdrawal and to avoid the potentially life-threatening complications of high blood pressure, fast heart
rate, and seizures. Drugs called benzodiazapines are
helpful in those patients suffering from hallucinations.
Because of the patient’s nausea, fluids may need to be
given through a vein (intravenously), along with some
necessary sugars and salts. It is crucial that thiamine
be included in the fluids, because thiamine is usually
quite low in alcoholic patients, and deficiency of thiamine is responsible for the Wernicke-Korsakoff
syndrome
After cessation of drinking has been accomplished, the next steps involve helping the patient
avoid ever taking another drink. This phase of treatment is referred to asrehabilitation. The best programs
incorporate the family into the therapy, because the
family has undoubtedly been severely affected by the
patient’s drinking. Some therapists believe that family
members, in an effort to deal with their loved one’s
drinking problem, sometimes develop patterns of
behavior that accidentally support or ‘‘enable’’ the
patient’s drinking. This situation is referred to as
‘‘co-dependence,’’ and must be addressed in order to
successfully treat a person’s alcoholism.
Sessions led by peers, where recovering alcoholics
meet regularly and provide support for each other’s
recoveries, are considered among the best methods of
preventing a return to drinking (relapse). Perhaps the
most well-known such group is called Alcoholics
Anonymous, which uses a ‘‘12-step’’ model to help
people avoid drinking. These steps involve recognizing
the destructive power that alcohol has held over
the alcoholic’s life, looking to a higher power for
help in overcoming the problem, and reflecting on
the ways in which the use of alcohol has hurt others
and, if possible, making amends to those people.
According to a recent study reported by the American
Psychological Association (APA), anyone, regardless
of his or her religious beliefs or lack of religious beliefs,
can benefit from participation in 12-step programs
such as Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) or Narcotics
Anonymous (NA). The number of visits to 12-step
self-help groups exceeds the number of visits to all
mental health professionals combined.
There are also medications that may help an alcoholic avoid returning to drinking. These have been
used with variable success. Disulfiram (Antabuse)
is a drug which, when mixed with alcohol, causes
unpleasant reactions including nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, and trembling. Naltrexone, along with a
similar compound, Nalmefene, can be helpful in limiting the effects of a relapse. Acamprosate is helpful in
preventing relapse. None of these medications would
be helpful unless the patient was also willing to work
very hard to change his or her behavior. In 2004, a new
compound was discovered that blocks actions of
chemicals in the brain that may lead to relapses.
Clinical tests were still underway, but development of
such a drug could have great potential in the medical
management of alcoholism. Another study that year
found that topiramate (Topamax), an antiseizure
medication, was effective in treating alcohol dependence in 150 participants in a clinical trial. The authors
called for further study of this possible treatment.
Alternative treatment
Alternative treatments can be a helpful adjunct
for the alcoholic patient, once the medical danger of
withdrawal has passed. Because many alcoholics
have very stressful lives (whether because of or leading to the alcoholism is sometimes a matter of
debate), many of the treatments for alcoholism
involve dealing with and relieving stress. These
include massage, meditation, and hypnotherapy. The
malnutrition of long-term alcohol use is addressed by
nutrition-oriented practitioners with careful attention to a healthy diet and the use of nutritional supplements such as vitamins A, B complex, and C, as
well as certain fatty acids, amino acids, zinc, magnesium, and selenium. Herbal treatments include milk
thistle (Silybum marianum), which is thought to protect the liver against damage. Other herbs are thought
to be helpful for the patient suffering through withdrawal. Some of these include lavender (Lavandula
officinalis), skullcap (Scutellaria lateriflora), chamomile (Matricaria recutita), peppermint (Mentha
piperita) yarrow (Achillea millefolium), and valerian
(Valeriana officinalis). Acupuncture is believed to
both decrease withdrawal symptoms and to help
improve a patient’s chances for continued recovery
from alcoholism.
Prognosis
Recovery from alcoholism is a life-long process.
In fact, people who have suffered from alcoholism are
encouraged to refer to themselves ever after as ‘‘a
recovering alcoholic,’’ never a recovered alcoholic.
This is because most researchers in the field believe
that since the potential for alcoholism is still part of
the individual’s biological and psychological makeup,
one can never fully recover from alcoholism. The
potential for relapse (returning to illness) is always
there, and must be acknowledged and respected.
Statistics suggest that, among middle-class alcoholics
in stable financial and family situations who have
undergone treatment, 60% or more can be successful
at an attempt to stop drinking for at least a year, and
many for a lifetime.
Prevention
Prevention must begin at a relatively young age
since the first instance of intoxication (drunkenness)
usually occurs during the teenage years. In fact, a 2004
study found that girls experimented with alcohol and
cigarettes at a younger age — 20% by seventh grage —
than boys. It is particularly important that teenagers
who are at high risk for alcoholism—those with a
family history of alcoholism, an early or frequent use
of alcohol, a tendency to drink to drunkenness, alcohol use that interferes with school work, a poor family
environment, or a history of domestic violence —
receive education about alcohol and its long-term
effects. How this is best achieved, without irritating
the youngsters and thus losing their attention, is the
subject of continuing debate and study.