Definition
This test measures the levels of aldosterone, a
hormone produced by the outer part (cortex) of the
two adrenal glands, organs which sit one on top of
each of the kidneys. Aldosterone regulates the
amounts of sodium and potassium in the blood. This
helps maintain water balance and blood volume,
which, in turn, affects blood pressure.
Purpose
Aldosterone measurement is useful in detecting a
condition called aldosteronism, which is caused by
excess secretion of the hormone from the adrenal
glands. There are two types of aldosteronism: primary
and secondary. Primary aldosteronism is most commonly caused by an adrenal tumor, as in Conn’s
syndrome. Idiopathic (of unknown cause) hyperaldosteronism is another type of primary aldosteronism.
Secondary aldosteronism is more common and may
occur with congestive heart failure, cirrhosis with fluid
in the abdominal cavity (ascites), certain kidney diseases, excess potassium, sodium-depleted diet, and
toxemia of pregnancy.
To differentiate primary aldosteronism from secondary aldosteronism, a plasma renin test should be
performed at the same time as the aldosterone assay.
Renin, an enzyme produced in the kidneys, is high in
secondary aldosteronism and low in primary
aldosteronism.
Description
Aldosterone testing can be performed on a blood
sample or on a 24-hour urine specimen. Several factors, including diet, posture (upright or lying down),
and time of day that the sample is obtained can cause
aldosterone levels to fluctuate. Blood samples are
affected by short-term fluctuations. A urine specimen
collected over an entire 24-hour period lessens the
effects of those interfering factors and provides a
more reliable aldosterone measurement.
Preparation
Fasting is not required for either the blood sample
or urine collection, but the patient should maintain a
normal sodium diet (approximately 0.1 oz [3g]/day)
for at least two weeks before either test. The doctor
should decide if drugs that alter sodium, potassium,
and fluid balance (e.g., diuretics, antihypertensives,
	steroids, oral contraceptives) should be withheld. The
test will be more accurate if these are suspended at
at least two weeks before the test. Renin inhibitors
(e.g., propranolol) should not be taken one week
before the test, unless permitted by the physician.
The patient should avoid licorice for at least two
weeks before the test, because of its aldosterone-like
effect. Strenuous exercise and stress can increase
aldosterone levels as well. Because the test is usually
performed by a method called radioimmunoassay,
recently administered radioactive medications will
affect test results.
Since posture and body position affect aldosterone, hospitalized patients should remain in an
upright position (at least sitting) for two hours
before blood is drawn. Occasionally blood will be
drawn again before the patient gets out of bed.
Nonhospitalized patients should arrive at the laboratory in time to maintain an upright position for at
least two hours.
Risks
Risks for this test are minimal, but may include
slight bleeding from the blood-drawing site, fainting
or feeling lightheaded after venipuncture, or hematoma (blood accumulating under the puncture site).
Normal results
Normal results are laboratory-specific and also
vary with sodium intake, with time of day, source of
specimen (e.g., peripheral vein, adrenal vein, 24-hour
urine), age, sex, and posture.
Reference ranges for blood include:

supine (lying down): 3-10 ng/dL

upright (sitting for at least two hours): Female:
5-30ng/dL; Male: 6-22 ng/dL.
Reference ranges for urine: 2-80 mg/24 hr.
Abnormal results
Increased levels of aldosterone are found in Conn’s
disease (aldosterone-producing adrenal tumor), and in
cases of Bartter’s syndrome (a condition in which the
kidneys overexcrete potassium, sodium and chloride,
resulting in low blood levels of potassium and high
blood levels of aldosterone and renin). Among other
conditions, elevated levels are also seen in secondary
aldosteronism, stress, and malignant hypertension.
Decreased levels of aldosterone are found in
aldosterone deficiency, steroid therapy, high-sodium
diets, certain antihypertensive therapies, and
Addison’s disease (an autoimmune disorder).