Definition
The Alexander technique is a somatic method
for improving physical and mental functioning.
Excessive tension, which Frederick Alexander, the
originator, recognized as both physical and mental,
restricts movement and creates pressure in the joints,
the spine, the breathing mechanism, and other organs.
The goal of the technique is to restore freedom and
expression to the body and clear thinking to the mind.
Purpose
Because the Alexander technique helps students
improve overall functioning, both mental and physical, it offers a wide range of benefits. Nikolaas
Tinbergen, in his 1973 Nobel lecture, hailed the ‘‘striking improvements in such diverse things as high blood
pressure, breathing, depth of sleep, overall cheerfulness and mental alertness, resilience against outside
pressures, and the refined skill of playing a musical
instrument.’’ He went on to quote a list of other conditions helped by the Alexander technique: ‘‘rheumatism, including various forms of arthritis, then
respiratory troubles, and even potentially lethal
asthma; following in their wake, circulation defects,
which may lead to high blood pressure and also to
some dangerous heart conditions; gastrointestinal disorders of many types, various gynecological conditions, sexual failures, migraines and depressive states.’’
Literature in the 1980s and 1990s went on to
include improvements in back pain, chronic pain, postural problems, repetitive strain injury, benefits during
pregnancy and childbirth, help in applying physical
therapy and rehabilitative exercises, improvements in
strain caused by computer use, improvements in the
posture and performance of school children, and
improvements in vocal and dramatic performance
among the benefits offered by the technique.
Description
Origins
Frederick Matthias Alexander was born in 1869 in
Tasmania, Australia. He became an actor and
Shakespearean reciter, and early in his career he
began to suffer from strain on his vocal chords. He
sought medical attention for chronic hoarseness, but
after treatment with a recommended prescription and
extensive periods of rest, his problem persisted.
Alexander realized that his hoarseness began
about an hour into a dramatic performance and
reasoned that it was something he did in the process
of reciting that caused him to lose his voice. Returning
to his medical doctor, Alexander told him of his
observation. When the doctor admitted that he
didn’t know what Alexander was doing to injure
his vocal chords, Alexander decided to try and find
out for himself.
Thus began a decade of self-observation and discovery. Using as many as three mirrors to observe himself in
the act of reciting, normal speaking, and later standing,
walking, and sitting, Alexander managed to improve
his coordination and to overcome his vocal problems.
One of his most startling discoveries was that in order to
change the way he used his body he had to change the
way he was thinking, redirecting his thoughts in such a
way that he did not produce unnecessary tension
when he attempted speech or movement. After making
this discovery at the end of the nineteenth century,
Alexander became a pioneer in body-mind medicine.
At first, performers and dancers sought guidance
from Alexander to overcome physical complaints and
to improve the expression and spontaneity of their
performances. Soon a great number of people sought
help from his teaching for a variety of physical and
mental disorders.
The Alexander technique is primarily taught oneon-one in private lessons. Introductory workshops or
workshops for special applications of the technique
(e.g.,workshops for musicians) are also common.
Private lessons range from a half-hour to an hour in
length, and are taught in a series. The number of lessons
varies according to the severity of the student’s difficulties with coordination or to the extent of the student’s
interest in pursuing the improvements made possible by
continued study. The cost of lessons ranges from $40-80
per hour. Insurance coverage is not widely available,
but discounts are available for participants in some
complementary care insurance plans. Pre-tax Flexible
Spending Accounts for health care cover Alexander
technique lessons if they are prescribed by a physician.
In lessons teachers guide students through simple
movements (while students are dressed in comfortable
clothing) and use their hands to help students identify
and stop destructive patterns of tension. Tensing
arises from mental processes as well as physical, so
discussions of personal reactions or behavior are likely
to arise in the course of a lesson.
The technique helps students move with ease and
improved coordination. At the beginning of a movement (the lessons are a series of movements), most people pull back their heads, raise their shoulders toward
their ears, over-arch their lower backs, tighten their legs,
and otherwise produce excessive tension in their bodies.
Alexander referred to this as misuse of the body.
At any point in a movement, proper use can be
established. If the neck muscles are not over-tensed,
the head will carry slightly forward of the spine, simply
because it is heavier in the front. When the head is out
of balance in the forward direction, it sets off a series
of stretch reflexes in the extensor muscles of the back.
It is skillful use of these reflexes, along with reflex
activity in the feet and legs, the arms and hands, the
breathing mechanism, and other parts of the body,
that lessons in the technique aim to develop.
Alexander found that optimal functioning of the
body was very hard to maintain, even for the short
period of time it took to complete a single movement.
People, especially adults, have very strong tension
habits associated with movement. Chronic misuse of
the muscles is common. It may be caused by slouching
in front of televisions or video monitors, too much
sitting or driving and too little walking, or by tension
associated with past traumas and injuries. Stiffening
the neck after a whiplash injury or favoring a broken or
sprained leg long after it has healed are examples of
habitual tension caused by injury.
The first thing a teacher of the Alexander technique does is to increase a student’s sensory awareness
of this excessive habitual tension, particularly that in
the neck and spine. Next the student is taught to
inhibit the tension. If the student prepares to sit
down, for example, he will tense his muscles in his
habitual way. If he is asked to put aside the intention
to sit and instead to free his neck and allow less constriction in his muscles, he can begin to change his
tense habitual response to sitting.
By leaving the head resting on the spine in its
natural free balance, by keeping eyes open and
focused, not held in a tense stare, by allowing the
shoulders to release, the knees to unlock and the
back to lengthen and widen, a student greatly reduces
strain. In Alexander lessons students learn to direct
themselves this way in activity and become skilled in
fluid, coordinated movement.
Precautions
Side effects
The focus of the Alexander technique is educational. Teachers use their hands simply to gently guide
students in movement. Therefore, both contraindications and potential physiological side effects are kept
to a minimum. No forceful treatment of soft tissue or
bony structure is attempted, so damage to tissues, even
in the case of errors in teaching, is unlikely.
As students’ sensory awareness develops in the
course of Alexander lessons, they become more
acutely aware of chronic tension patterns. As students
learn to release excessive tension in their muscles and
to sustain this release in daily activity, they may
experience tightness or soreness in the connective tissue. This is caused by the connective tissue adapting to
the lengthened and released muscles and the expanded
range of movement in the joints.
Occasionally students may get light-headed during a lesson as contracted muscles release and effect
the circulatory or respiratory functioning.
Forceful contraction of muscles and rigid postures often indicate suppression of emotion. As muscles release during or after an Alexander lesson,
students may experience strong surges of emotion or
sudden changes in mood. In some cases, somatic memories surface, bringing to consciousness past injury or
trauma. This can cause extreme anxiety, and referrals
may be made by the teacher for counseling.
Research and general acceptance
Alexander became well known among the intellectual, artistic, and medical communities in London,
England, during the first half of the twentieth century.
Among Alexander’s supporters were John Dewey,
Aldous Huxley, Bernard Shaw, and renowned scientists Raymond Dart, G.E. Coghill, Charles
Sherrington, and Nikolaas Tinbergen.
Researchers continue to study the effects and
applications of the technique in the fields of education,
preventive medicine, and rehabilitation. The
Alexander technique has proven an effective treatment
for reducing stress, for improving posture and performance in schoolchildren, for relieving chronic pain,
and for improving psychological functioning. The
technique has been found to be as effective as betablocker medications in controlling stress responses in
professional musicians, to enhance respiratory function in normal adults, and to mediate the effects of
scoliosis in adolescents and adults.