Definition
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, or
ABPA, is one of four major types of infections in
humans caused by Aspergillus fungi. ABPA is a hypersensitivity reaction that occurs in asthma patients who
are allergic to this specific fungus.
Description
ABPA is an allergic reaction to a species of
Aspergillus called Aspergillus fumigatus. It is sometimes grouped together with other lung disorders
characterized by eosinophilia–an abnormal increase
of a certain type of white blood cell in the blood–
under the heading of eosinophilic pneumonia. These
disorders are also called hypersensitivity lung
diseases.
ABPA appears to be increasing in frequency in the
United States, although the reasons for the increase
are not clear. The disorder is most likely to occur in
adult asthmatics aged 20-40. It affects males and
females equally.
Causes and symptoms
ABPA develops when the patient breathes air
containing Aspergillus spores. These spores are
found worldwide, especially around riverbanks,
marshes, bogs, forests, and wherever there is wet or
decaying vegetation. They are also found on wet
paint, construction materials, and in air conditioning systems. ABPA is a nosocomial infection,
which means that a patient can get it in a hospital.
When Aspergillus spores reach the bronchi, which
are the branches of the windpipe that lead into the
lungs, the bronchi react by contracting spasmodically. So the patient has difficulty breathing and
usually wheezes or coughs. Many patients with
ABPA also run a low-grade fever and lose their
appetites.
Complications
Patients with ABPA sometimes cough up large
amounts of blood, a condition that is called hemoptysis. They may also develop a serious long-term form of
bronchiectasis, the formation of fibrous tissue in the
lungs. Bronchiectasis is a chronic bronchial disorder
caused by repeated inflammation of the airway, and
marked by the abnormal enlargement of, or damage
to, the bronchial walls. ABPA sometimes occurs as a
complication of cystic fibrosis.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of ABPA is based on a combination
of the patient’s history and the results of blood tests,
sputum tests, skin tests, and diagnostic imaging. The
doctor will be concerned to distinguish between ABPA
and a worsening of the patient’s asthma, cystic fibrosis, or
other lung disorders. There are seven major criteria for
a diagnosis of allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis:

a history of asthma.

an accumulation of fluid in the lung that is visible on
a chest x ray.

bronchiectasis (abnormal stretching, enlarging, or
destruction of the walls of the bronchial tubes).

skin reaction to Aspergillus antigen.

eosinophilia in the patient’s blood and sputum.

Aspergillus precipitins in the patient’s blood.
Precipitins are antibodies that react with the antigen
to form a solid that separates from the rest of the
solution in the test tube.

a high level of IgE in the patient’s blood. IgE refers to
a class of antibodies in blood plasma that activate
allergic reactions to foreign particles.
Other criteria that may be used to support the
diagnosis include the presence of Aspergillus in samples of the patient’s sputum, the coughing up of plugs
of brown mucus, or a late skin reaction to the
Aspergillus antigen.
Laboratory tests
The laboratory tests that are done to obtain this
information include a complete blood count (CBC), a
sputum culture, a blood serum test of IgE levels, and
a skin test for the Aspergillus antigen. In the skin test, a
small amount of antigen is injected into the upper
layer of skin on the patient’s forearm about four
inches below the elbow. If the patient has a high
level of IgE antibodies in the tissue, he or she will
develop what is called a ‘‘wheal and flare’’ reaction
in about 15-20 minutes. A ‘‘wheal and flare’’ reaction
is characterized by the eruption of a reddened, itching
spot on the skin. Some patients with ABPA will
develop the so-called late reaction to the skin test, in
which a red, sore, swollen area develops about six to
eight hours after the initial reaction.
Diagnostic imaging
Chest x rays and CT scans are used to check for
the presence of fluid accumulation in the lungs and
signs of bronchiectasis.
Treatment
ABPA is usually treated with prednisone
(Meticorten) or other corticosteroids taken by mouth,
and with bronchodilators.
Antifungal drugs are not used to treat ABPA
because it is caused by an allergic reaction to
Aspergillus rather than by direct infection of tissue.
Follow-up care
Patients with ABPA should be given periodic checkupswith chest x rays and a spirometer test.A spirometeris
an instrument that evaluates the patient’s lung capacity.
Prognosis
Most patients with ABPA respond well to corticosteroid treatment. Others have a chronic course with
gradual improvement over time. The best indicator of
a good prognosis is a long-term fall in the patient’s IgE
level. Patients with lung complications from ABPA
may develop severe airway obstruction.
Prevention
ABPA is difficult to prevent because Aspergillus is
a common fungus; it can be found in the saliva and
sputum of most healthy individuals. Patients with
ABPA can protect themselves somewhat by avoiding
haystacks, compost piles, bogs, marshes, and other
locations with wet or rotting vegetation; by avoiding
construction sites or newly painted surfaces; and by
having their air conditioners cleaned regularly. Some
patients may be helped by air filtration systems for
their bedrooms or offices.