Definition
Allergic rhinitis, more commonly referred to as
hay fever, is an inflammation of the nasal passages
caused by allergic reaction to airborne substances.
Description
Allergic rhinitis (AR) is the most common allergic
condition and one of the most common of all minor
afflictions. It affects between 10-20% of all people in the
United States, and is responsible for 2.5% of all doctor
visits. Antihistamines and other drugs used to treat allergic rhinitis make up a significant fraction of both
prescription and over-the-counter drug sales each year.
There are two types of allergic rhinitis: seasonal
and perennial. Seasonal AR occurs in the spring, summer, and early fall, when airborne plant pollens are at
their highest levels. In fact, the term hay fever is really
a misnomer, since allergy to grass pollen is only one
cause of symptoms for most people. Perennial AR
occurs all year and is usually caused by home or workplace airborne pollutants. A person can be affected
by one or both types. Symptoms of seasonal AR are
worst after being outdoors, while symptoms of perennial AR are worst after spending time indoors.
Both types of allergies can develop at any age,
although onset in childhood through early adulthood
is most common. Although allergy to a particular
substance is not inherited, increased allergic sensitivity
may ‘‘run in the family.’’ While allergies can improve
on their own over time, they can also become worse
over time.
Causes and symptoms
Causes
Allergic rhinitis is a type of immune reaction.
Normally, the immune system responds to foreign
microorganisms, or particles, like pollen or dust, by
producing specific proteins, called antibodies, that are
capable of binding to identifying molecules, or antigens,
on the foreign particle. This reaction between antibody
and antigen sets off a series of reactions designed to
protect the body from infection. Sometimes, this same
series of reactions is triggered by harmless, everyday
substances. This is the condition known as allergy,
and the offending substance is called an allergen.
Like all allergic reactions, AR involves a special
set of cells in the immune system known as mast cells.
Mast cells, found in the lining of the nasal passages
and eyelids, display a special type of antibody, called
immunoglobulin type E (IgE), on their surface. Inside,
mast cells store reactive chemicals in small packets,
called granules. When the antibodies encounter
allergens, they trigger release of the granules, which
spill out their chemicals onto neighboring cells, including blood vessels and nerve cells. One of these
chemicals, histamine, binds to the surfaces of these
other cells, through special proteins called histamine
receptors. Interaction of histamine with receptors on
blood vessels causes neighboring cells to become
leaky, leading to the fluid collection, swelling, and
increased redness characteristic of a runny nose and
red, irritated eyes. Histamine also stimulates pain
receptors, causing the itchy, scratchy nose, eyes, and
throat common in allergic rhinitis.
The number of possible airborne allergens is
enormous. Seasonal AR is most commonly caused
by grass and tree pollens, since their pollen is produced
in large amounts and is dispersed by the wind. Showy
flowers, like roses or lilacs, that attract insects produce
a sticky pollen that is less likely to become airborne.
Different plants release their pollen at different times
of the year, so seasonal AR sufferers may be most
affected in spring, summer, or fall, depending on
which plants provoke a response. The amount of pollen
in the air is reflected in the pollen count, often broadcast on the daily news during allergy season. Pollen
counts tend to be lower after a good rain that washes
the pollen out of the air and higher on warm, dry,
windy days.
Virtually any type of tree or grass may cause AR.
A few types of weeds that tend to cause the most
trouble for people include the following:

ragweed

sagebrush

lamb’s-quarters

plantain

pigweed

dock/sorrel

tumbleweed
Perennial AR is often triggered by house dust, a
complicated mixture of airborne particles, many of
which are potent allergens. House dust contains
some or all of the following:

house mite body parts. All houses contain large numbers of microscopic insects called house mites. These
harmless insects feed on fibers, fur, and skin shed by
the house’s larger occupants. Their tiny body parts
easily become airborne.

animal dander. Animals constantly shed fur, skin
flakes, and dried saliva. Carried in the air, or transferred from pet to owner by direct contact, dander
can cause allergy in many sensitive people.

mold spores. Molds live in damp spots throughout
the house, including basements, bathrooms, air
ducts, air conditioners, refrigerator drains, damp
windowsills, mattresses, and stuffed furniture.
Mildew and other molds release airborne spores
that circulate throughout the house.
Other potential causes of perennial allergic rhinitis include the following:

cigarette smoke

perfume

cosmetics

cleansers

copier chemicals

industrial chemicals

construction material gases
Symptoms
Inflammation of the nose, or rhinitis, is the
major symptom of AR. Inflammation causes itching,
sneezing, runny nose, redness, and tenderness. Sinus
swelling can constrict the eustachian tube that connects the inner ear to the throat, causing a congested
feeling and ‘‘ear popping.’’ The drip of mucus from the
sinuses down the back of the throat, combined with
increased sensitivity, can also lead to throat irritation
and redness. AR usually also causes redness, itching,
and watery eyes. Fatigue and headache are also
common.
Diagnosis
Diagnosing seasonal AR is usually easy and can
often be done without a medical specialist. When
symptoms appear in spring or summer and disappear
with the onset of cold weather, seasonal AR is almost
certainly the culprit. Other causes of rhinitis, including infection, can usually be ruled out by a physical
examination and a nasal smear, in which a sample of
mucus is taken on a swab for examination.
Allergy tests, including skin testing and provocation testing, can help identify the precise culprit,
but may not be done unless a single source is
suspected and subsequent avoidance is possible.
Skin testing involves placing a small amount of
liquid containing a specific allergen on the skin and
then either poking, scratching, or injecting it into
the skin surface to observe whether redness and
swellings occurs. Provocation testing involves challenging an individual with either a small amount of
an inhalable or ingestable allergen to see if a response
is elicited.
Perennial AR can also usually be diagnosed by
careful questioning about the timing of exposure
and the onset of symptoms. Specific allergens can be
identified through allergy skin testing.
Treatment
Avoidance of the allergens is the best treatment,
but this is often not possible. When it is not possible to
avoid one or more allergens, there are two major forms
of medical treatment, drugs and immunotherapy.
Drugs
ANTIHISTAMINES. Antihistamines block the histamine receptors on nasal tissue, decreasing the effect of
histamine release by mast cells. They may be used after
symptoms appear, though they may be even more
effective when used preventively, before symptoms
appear. A wide variety of antihistamines are available.
Older antihistamines often produce drowsiness as
a major side effect. Such antihistamines include the
following:

diphenhydramine (Benadryl and generics)

chlorpheniramine (Chlor-trimeton and generics)

brompheniramine (Dimetane and generics)

clemastine (Tavist and generics).
Newer antihistamines that do not cause drowsiness are available by prescription and include the
following:

astemizole (Hismanal)

fexofenadine (Allegra)

cetirizine (Zyrtec)

azelastin HCl (Astelin).
Loratidine (Claritin) was available only by prescription but was released to over-the-counter status
by the FDA.
Hismanal has the potential to cause serious heart
arrhythmias when taken with the antibiotic erythromycin, the antifungal drugs ketoconazole and itraconazole, or the antimalarial drug quinine. Taking more than
the recommended dose of Hismanal can also cause
arrhythimas. Seldane (terfenadine), the original nondrowsy antihistamine, was voluntarily withdrawn from
the market by its manufacturers in early 1998 because
of this potential and because of the availability of an
equally effective, safer alternative drug, fexofenadine.
LEUKOTRIENE RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS. Leukotriene receptor antagonists (montelukast or Singulair
and zafirlukast or Accolate) are a newer class of drugs
used daily to help prevent asthma. They’ve also become
approved in the United States to treat allergic rhinitis. DECONGESTANTS. Decongestants constrict blood
vessels to counteract the effects of histamine. This
decreases the amount of blood in the nasopahryngeal
and sinus mucosa and reduces swelling. Nasal sprays
are available that can be applied directly to the nasal
lining and oral systemic preparations are available.
Decongestants are stimulants and may cause increased
heart rate and blood pressure, headaches, isomnia,
agitation and difficulty emptying the bladder. Use of
topical decongestants for longer than several days can
cause loss of effectiveness and rebound congestion, in
which nasal passages become more severely swollen
than before treatment.
TOPICAL CORTICOSTEROIDS. Topical corticosteroids reduce mucous membrane inflammation and are
available by prescription. Allergies tend to become
worse as the season progresses because the immune
system becomes sensitized to particular antigens and
can produce a faster, stronger response. Topical
corticosteroids are especially effective at reducing this
seasonal sensitization because they work more slowly
and last longer than most other medication types. As
a result, they are best started before allergy season
begins. Side effects are usually mild, but may include
headaches, nosebleeds, and unpleasant taste sensations.
MAST CELL STABILIZERS. Cromolyn sodium prevents the release of mast cell granules, thereby preventing release of histamine and the other chemicals
contained in them. It acts as a preventive treatment if it
is begun several weeks before the onset of the allergy
season. It can be used for perennial AR as well.
Immunotherapy
Immunotherapy, also known as desensitization or
allergy shots, alters the balance of antibody types in the
body, thereby reducing the ability of IgE to cause allergic
reactions. Immunotherapy is preceded by allergy testing
to determine the precise allergens responsible. Injections
involve very small but gradually increasing amounts of
allergen, over several weeks or months, with periodic
boosters. Full benefits may take up to several years to
achieve and are not seen at all in about one in five
patients. Individuals receiving all shots will be monitored closely following each shot because of the small
risk of anaphylaxis, a condition that can result in difficulty breathing and a sharp drop in blood pressure.
Alternative treatment
Alternative treatments for AR often focus on modulation of the body’s immune response, and
frequently center around diet and lifestyle adjustments.
Chinese herbal medicine can help rebalance a person’s
system, as can both acute and constitutional homeopathic treatment. Vitamin C in substantial amounts can
help stabilize the mucous membrane response. For
symptom relief, western herbal remedies including eyebright (Euphrasia officinalis) and nettle (Urtica dioica)may
be helpful. Bee pollen may also be effective in alleviating
or eliminating AR symptoms. A 2004 report said that
phototherapy (treatment with a combination of ultraviolet and visible light) decreased the symptoms of allergic
rhinitis in amajority of patients who did not respond well
to traditional drug treatment.
Prognosis
Most people with AR can achieve adequate relief
with a combination of preventive strategies and treatment. While allergies may improve over time, they
may also get worse or expand to include new allergens.
Early treatment can help prevent an increased sensitization to other allergens.
Prevention
Reducing exposure to pollen may improve symptoms of seasonal AR. Strategies include the following:

stay indoors with windows closed during the morning hours, when pollen levels are highest

keep car windows up while driving

use a surgical face mask when outside

avoid uncut fields

learn which trees are producing pollen in which seasons, and avoid forests at the height of pollen season

wash clothes and hair after being outside

clean air conditioner filters in the home regularly

use electrostatic filters for central air conditioning
Moving to a region with lower pollen levels is
rarely effective, since new allergies often develop
Preventing perennial AR requires identification of
the responsible allergens.
Mold spores:

keep the house dry through ventilation and use of
dehumidifiers

use a disinfectant such as dilute bleach to clean
surfaces such as bathroom floors and walls

have ducts cleaned and disinfected

clean and disinfect air conditioners and coolers

throw out moldy or mildewed books, shoes, pillows,
or furniture
House dust:

vacuum frequently, and change the bag regularly. Use
a bag with small pores to catch extra-fine particles
clean floors and walls with a damp mop

install electrostatic filters in heating and cooling
ducts, and change all filters regularly
Animal dander:

avoid contact if possible

wash hands after contact

vacuum frequently

keep pets out of the bedroom, and off furniture, rugs,
and other dander-catching surfaces

have your pets bathed and groomed frequently