Definition
Alopecia simply means hair loss (baldness).
Description
Hair loss occurs for a great many reasons, from
conditions that make people literally pull it out to
complete hair loss caused by the toxicity of cancer
chemotherapy. Some causes are considered natural,
while others signal serious health problems. Some
conditions are confined to the scalp. Others reflect
disease throughout the body. Being plainly visible,
the skin and its components can provide early signs
of disease elsewhere in the body.
Oftentimes, conditions affecting the skin of the
scalp will result in hair loss. The first clue to the specific
cause is the pattern of hair loss, whether it be complete
baldness (alopecia totalis), patchy bald spots, thinning,
or hair loss confined to certain areas. Also a factor is
the condition of the hair and the scalp beneath it.
Sometimes only the hair is affected; sometimes the
skin is visibly diseased as well.
Causes and symptoms

Male pattern baldness (androgenic alopecia) is considered normal in adult males. It is easily recognized
by the distribution of hair loss over the top and front
of the head and by the healthy condition of the scalp.
cause that can be patchy or extend to complete
baldness.

Fungal infections of the scalp usually cause patchy
hair loss. The fungus, similar to the ones that cause
athlete’s foot and ringworm, often glows under ultraviolet light.

Trichotillomania is the name of a mental disorder
that causes a person to pull out his or her own hair.

Complete hair loss is a common result of cancer
chemotherapy, due to the toxicity of the drugs used.

Systemic diseases often affect hair growth either
selectively or by altering the skin of the scalp. One
example is thyroid disorders. Hyperthyroidism
(too much thyroid hormone) causes hair to become
thin and fine. Hypothyroidism (too little thyroid
hormone) thickens both hair and skin.

Several autoimmune diseases (when protective cells
begin to attack self cells within the body) affect the
skin, notably lupus erythemematosus.

In 2004, a report a the annual meeting of the
American Academy of Dermatology said that alopecia was becoming nearly epidemic among black
women as a result of some hairstyles that pull too
tightly on the scalp and harsh chemical treatments
that damage the hair shaft and follicles.
Diagnosis
Dermatologists are skilled in diagnosis by sight
alone. For more obscure diseases, they may have to
resort to a skin biopsy, removing a tiny bit of skin using
a local anesthetic so that it can be examined under a
microscope. Systemic diseases will require a complete
evaluation by a physician, including specific tests to
identify and characterize the problem.
Treatment
Successful treatment of underlying causes is most
likely to restore hair growth, be it the completion of
chemotherapy, effective cure of a scalp fungus, or control of a systemic disease. Two relatively new drugs–
minoxidil (Rogaine) and finasteride (Proscar)–promote
hair growth in a significant minority of patients,
especially those with male pattern baldness and alopecia areata. While both drugs have so far proved to be
quite safe when used for this purpose, minoxidil is a
liquid that is applied to the scalp and finasteride is
the first and only approved treatment in a pill form.
Minoxidil was approved for over-the-counter
sales in 1996. When used continuously for long periods of time, minoxidil produces satisfactory results in
about one-fourth of patients with androgenic alopecia
and as many as half the patients with alopecia areata.
There is also an over-the-counter extra-strength
version of minoxidil (5% concentration) approved for
use by men only. The treatment often results in new
hair that is thinner and lighter in color. It is important
to note that new hair stops growing soon after the use
of minoxidil is discontinued.
Over the past few decades a multitude of hair
replacement methods have been performed by physicians and non-physicians. They range from simply
weaving someone else’s hair in with the remains of
one’s own to surgically transplanting thousands of
hair follicles one at a time.
Hair transplantation is completed by taking tiny
plugs of skin, each containing one to several hairs,
from the back side of the scalp. The bald sections are
then implanted with the plugs. Research completed in
2000 looked at the new technique of hair grafting, and
found that micrografts (one or two hairs transplanted
per follicle) resulted in fewer complications and the
best results.
Another surgical procedure used to treat androgenic alopecia is scalp reduction. By stretching skin,
the hairless scalp can be removed and the area of bald
skin decreased by closing the space with hair-covered
scalp. Hair-bearing skin can also be folded over an
area of bald skin with a technique called a flap.
Stem cell research is generating new hope for
baldness. Scientists know that a part of the hair follicle
called the bulge contains stem cells that can give rise to
new hair and help heal skin wounds. Early research
with mice in 2004 showed promise for identifying the
genes that cause baldness and to identify drugs that
can reverse the process.
Prognosis
The prognosis varies with the cause. It is generally
much easier to lose hair than to regrow it. Even when it
returns, it is often thin and less attractive than the
original.