Definition
Alpha1-adrenergic blockers are drugs that work
by blocking the alpha1-receptors of vascular smooth
muscle, thus preventing the uptake of catecholamines
by the smooth muscle cells. This causes vasodilation
and allows blood to flow more easily.
Purpose
These drugs, called alpha blockers for short, are
used for two main purposes: to treat high blood pressure (hypertension) and to treat benign prostatic
hyperplasia (BPH), a condition that affects men and
is characterized by an enlarged prostate gland.
High blood pressure
High blood pressure puts a strain on the heart and
the arteries. Over time, hypertension can damage the
blood vessels to the point of causing stroke, heart failure or kidney failure. People with high blood pressure
may also be at higher risk for heart attacks.
Controlling high blood pressure makes these problems
less likely. Alpha blockers help lower blood pressure
by causing vasodilation, meaning an increase in the
diameter of the blood vessels, which allows blood to
flow more easily.
Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH)
This condition particularly affects older men.
Over time, the prostate, a donut-shaped gland
below the bladder, enlarges. When this happens, it
may interfere with the passage of urine from the
bladder out of the body. Men who are diagnosed
with BPH may have to urinate more often. Or they
may feel that they can not completely empty their
bladders. Alpha blockers inhibit the contraction of
prostatic smooth muscle and thus relax muscles in
the prostate and the bladder, allowing urine to flow
more freely.
Description
Commonly prescribed alpha blockers for hypertension and BPH include doxazosin (Cardura, prazosin (Minipress) and terazosin (Hytrin). Prazosin is also
used in the treatment of heart failure. All are available
only with a physician’s prescription and are sold in
tablet form.
Recommended dosage
The recommended dose depends on the patient
and the type of alpha blocker and may change over
the course of treatment. The prescribing physician will
gradually increase the dosage, if necessary. Some
patients may need as much as 15-20 mg per day of
terazosin, 16 mg per day of doxazosin, or as much as
40 mg per day of prazosin, but most people benefit
from lower doses. As the dosage increases, so does the
possibility of unwanted side effects.
Alpha blockers should be taken exactly as directed, even if the medication does not seem to be working at first. It should not be stopped even if symptoms
improve because it needs to be taken regularly to be
effective. Patients should avoid missing any doses, and
should not take larger or more frequent doses to make
up for missed doses.
Precautions
Alpha blockers may lower blood pressure to a
greater extent than desired. This can cause dizziness,
lightheadedness, heart palpitations, and fainting.
Activities such as driving, using machines, or doing
anything else that might be dangerous for 24 hours
after taking the first dose should be avoided. Patients
should be reminded to be especially careful not to
fall when getting up in the middle of the night. The
same precautions are recommended if the dosage
is increased or if the drug has been stopped and
then started again. Anyone whose safety on the job
could be affected by taking alpha blockers should
inform his or her physician, so that the physician
can take this factor into account when increasing
dosage.
Some people may feel drowsy or less alert when
using these drugs. They should accordingly avoid
driving or performing activities that require full
attention.
People diagnosed with kidney disease or liver disease may also be more sensitive to alpha blockers.
They should inform their physicians about these conditions if alpha blockers are prescribed. Older people
may also be more sensitive and may be more likely to
have unwanted side effects, such as fainting, dizziness,
and lightheadedness.
It should be noted that alpha blockers do not cure
high blood pressure. They simply help to keep the
condition under control. Similarly, these drugs will
not shrink an enlarged prostate gland. Although they
will help relieve the symptoms of prostate enlargement, the prostate may continue to grow, and it eventually may be necessary to have prostate surgery.
Alpha blockers may lower blood counts. Patients
may need to have their blood checked regularly while
taking this medicine.
Anyone who has had unusual reactions to alpha
blockers in the past should let his or her physician
know before taking the drugs again. The physician
should also be told about any allergies to foods,
dyes, preservatives, or other substances.
The effects of taking alpha blockers during pregnancy are not fully understood. Women who are pregnant or planning to become pregnant should inform
their physicians. Breastfeeding mothers who need to
take alpha blockers should also talk to their physicians. These drugs can pass into breast milk and may
affect nursing babies. It may be necessary to stop
breastfeeding while being treated with alpha blockers.
Side effects
The most common side effects are dizziness, drowsiness, tiredness, headache, nervousness, irritability,
stuffy or runny nose, nausea, pain in the arms and legs,
and weakness. These problems usually go away as the
body adjusts to the drug and do not require medical
treatment. If they do not subside or if they interfere with
normal activities, the physician should be informed.
If any of the following side effects occur, the prescribing physician should be notified as soon as possible:

fainting

shortness of breath or difficulty breathing

fast, pounding, or irregular heartbeat

swollen feet, ankles, wrists
Other side effects may occur. Anyone who has
unusual symptoms after taking alpha blockers should
contact his or her physician.
Interactions
Doxazosin (Cardura) is not known to interact
with any other drugs. Terazosin (Hytrin) may interact
with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, such as
ibuprofen (Motrin), and with other blood pressure
drugs, such as enalapril (Vasotec), and verapamil
(Calan,Verelan). Prazosin (Minipress) may interact
with beta adrenergic blocking agents such as propranolol (Inderal) and others, and with verapamil (Calan,
Isoptin.) When drugs interact, the effects of one or
both of the drugs may change or the risk of side effects
may be greater.