Definition
A hereditary disease of the kidneys that primarily
affects men, causing blood in the urine, hearing loss
and eye problems. Eventually, kidney dialysis or transplant may be necessary.
Description
Alport syndrome affects about one in 5,000
Americans, striking men more often and severely
than women. There are several varieties of the syndrome, some occurring in childhood and others not
causing symptoms until men reach their 20s or 30s. All
varieties of the syndrome are characterized by kidney
disease that usually progresses to chronic kidney failure and by uremia (the presence of excessive amounts
of urea and other waste products in the blood).
Causes and symptoms
Alport syndrome in most cases is caused by a
defect in one or more genes located on the X chromosome. It is usually inherited from the mother, who is a
normal carrier. However, in up to 20% of cases there is
no family history of the disorder. In these cases, there
appears to be a spontaneous genetic mutation causing
Alport syndrome.
Blood in the urine (hematuria) is a hallmark of
Alport syndrome. Other symptoms that may appear in
varying combinations include:

protein in the urine (proteinuria)

sensorineural hearing loss

eye problems [involuntary, rhythmic eye movements
(nystagmus), cataracts, or cornea problems]

skin problems

platelet disorders

abnormal white blood cells

smooth muscle tumors
Not all patients with Alport syndrome have hearing problems. In general, those with normal hearing
have less severe cases of Alport syndrome.
Diagnosis
Alport syndrome is diagnosed with a medical evaluation and family history, together with a kidney
biopsy that can detect changes in the kidney typical of
the condition. Urinalysis may reveal blood or protein in
the urine. Blood tests can reveal a low platelet level.
In addition, tests for the Alport gene are now
available. Although testing is fairly expensive, it is
covered by many types of health insurance. DNA
tests can diagnose affected children even before birth,
and genetic linkage tests tracing all family members at
risk for Alport syndrome are also available.
Treatment
There is no specific treatment that can ‘‘cure’’
Alport syndrome. Instead, care is aimed at easing the
problems related to kidney failure, such as the presence
of too many waste products in the blood (uremia).
To control kidney inflammation (nephritis),
patients should:

restrict fluids

control high blood pressure

manage pulmonary edema

control high blood levels of potassium
Rarely patients with Alport syndrome may develop
nephrotic syndrome, a group of symptoms including
too much protein in the urine, low albumin levels, and
swelling. To ease these symptoms, patients should:

drink less

eat a salt-free diet

use diuretics

have albumin transfusions
The treatment for chronic kidney failure is dialysis
or a kidney transplant.
Prognosis
Women with this condition can lead a normal life,
although they may have slight hearing loss. An
affected woman may notice blood in her urine only
when under stress or pregnant.
Men generally have a much more serious problem
with the disease. Most will experience kidney disease
in their 20s or 30s, which may eventually require dialysis or transplantation, and many develop significant
hearing loss. Men with Alport syndrome often die of
complications by middle age.
Prevention
Alport syndrome is a genetic disease and prevention efforts are aimed at providing affected individuals
and their families with information concerning the
genetic mechanisms responsible for the disease. Since
it is possible to determine if a woman is a carrier, or if
an unborn child has the condition, genetic counseling
can provide helpful information and support for the
decisions that affected individuals and their families
may have to make.