Definition
Altitude sickness is a general term encompassing a
spectrum of disorders that occur at higher altitudes.
Since the severity of symptoms varies with altitude, it
is important to understand the range of the different
altitudes that may be involved. High altitude is defined
as height greater than 8,000 feet (2,438m); medium
altitude is defined as height between 5,000 and 8,000
feet (1,524-2,438m); and extreme altitude is defined as
height greater than 19,000 feet (5,791 m). The majority
of healthy individuals suffer from altitude sickness when
they reach very high altitudes. In addition, about 20%
of people ascending above 9,000 feet (2,743m) in one
day will develop altitude sickness. Children under six
years and women in the premenstrual part of their cycles
may be more vulnerable. Individuals with preexisting
medical conditions–even a minor respiratory infection–
may become sick at more moderate altitudes.
Description
There are three major clinical syndromes that fall
under the heading of altitude sickness: acute mountain
sickness (AMS), high-altitude pulmonary edema
(HAPE), and high-altitude cerebral edema (HACE).
These syndromes are not separate, individual syndromes as much as they are a continuum of severity,
all resulting from a decrease in oxygen in the air. AMS
is the mildest, and the other two represent severe, lifethreatening forms of altitude sickness.
Altitude sickness occurs because the partial pressure of oxygen decreases with altitude. (Partial pressure is a term applied to gases that is similar to the way
the term concentration is applied to liquid solutions.)
For instance, at 18,000 feet (5,486 m) the partial pressure of oxygen drops to one-half its value at sea level
and, therefore, there is a substantially lower amount of
oxygen available for the individual to inhale. This is
known as hypoxia. Furthermore, since there is less
oxygen to inhale, less oxygen reaches the blood. This
is known as hypoxemia. These two conditions are the
major factors that form the basis for all the medical
problems associated with altitude sickness.
As a person becomes hypoxemic, his natural
response is to breathe more rapidly (hyperventilate).
This is the body’s attempt to bring in more oxygen at
a rapid rate. This attempt at alleviating the effects of the
hypoxia at higher altitudes is known as acclimatization,
and it occurs during the first few days. Acclimatization
is a response that occurs in individuals who travel from
lower to higher altitudes. There are groups of people
who have lived at high altitudes (for example, in the
Himalayan and Andes mountains) for generations, and
they are simply accustomed to living at such altitudes,
perhaps through a genetic ability.
Causes and symptoms
Acute mountain sickness (AMS) is a mild form of
altitude sickness that results from ascent to altitudes
higher greater than 8,000 feet (2,438m)–even 6,500 feet
(1,981 m) in some susceptible individuals. Although
hypoxia is associated with the development of AMS,
the exact mechanism by which this condition develops
has yet to be confirmed. It is important to realize that
some individuals acclimatize to higher altitudes more
efficiently than others. As a result, under similar conditions some will suffer from AMS while others will not.
At present, the susceptibility of otherwise healthy individuals to contracting AMS cannot be accurately predicted. Of those who do suffer from AMS, the condition
tends to be most severe on the second or third day after
reaching the high altitude, and it usually abates after
three to five days if they remain at the same
altitude. However, it can recur if the individuals travel
to an even higher altitude. Symptoms usually appear a
few hours to a few days following ascent, and they
include dizziness, headache, shortness of breath, nausea,
vomiting, loss of appetite, and insomnia.
High-altitude pulmonary edema (HAPE) is a lifethreatening condition that afflicts a small percentage
of those who suffer from AMS. In this condition, fluid
leaks from within the pulmonary blood vessels into the
lung tissue. As this fluid begins to accumulate within
the lung tissue (pulmonary edema), the individual
begins to become more and more short of breath.
HAPE is known to afflict all types of individuals,
regardless of their level of physical fitness.
Typically, the individual who suffers from HAPE
ascends quickly to a high altitude and almost immediately develops shortness of breath, a rapid heart
rate, a cough productive of a large amount of sometimes bloody sputum, and a rapid rate of breathing.
If no medical assistance is provided by this point,
the patient goes into a coma and dies within a few
hours.
High-altitude cerebral edema (HACE), the rarest
and most severe form of altitude sickness, involves
cerebral edema, and its mechanism of development is
also poorly understood. The symptoms often begin
with those of AMS, but neurologic symptoms such
as an altered level of consciousness, speech abnormalities, severe headache, loss of coordination, hallucinations, and even seizures. If no intervention is
implemented, death is the result.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis for altitude sickness may be made
from the observation of the individual’s symptoms
during travel to higher altitudes.
Treatment
Mild AMS requires no treatment other than an
aspirin or ibuprofen for headache, and avoidance of
further ascent. Narcotics should be avoided because
they may blunt the respiratory response, making
it even more difficult for the person to breathe deeply
and rapidly enough to compensate for the lower levels
of oxygen in the environment. Oxygen may also be
used to alleviate symptoms of mild AMS.
As for HAPE and HACE, the most important
course of action is descent to a lower altitude as soon
as possible. Even a 1,000-2,000-foot (305-610 m) descent can dramatically improve one’s symptoms. If
descent is not possible, oxygen therapy should be
started. In addition, dexamethasone (a steroid) has
been suggested in order to reduce cerebral edema.
Prognosis
The prognosis for mild AMS is good, if appropriate measures are taken. As for HAPE and HACE,
the prognosis depends upon the rapidity and distance
of descent and the availability of medical intervention.
Descent often leads to improvement of symptoms,
however, recovery times vary among individuals.
Prevention
When individuals ascend from sea level, it is recommended that they spend at least one night at
an intermediate altitude prior to ascending to higher
elevations. In general, climbers should take at least two
days to go from sea level to 8,000 feet (2,438m). After
reaching that point, healthy climbers should generally
allow one day for each additional 2,000 feet (610m), and
one day of rest should be taken every two or three days.
Should mild symptoms begin to surface, further ascent
should be avoided. If the symptoms are severe, the individual should return to a lower altitude. Some reports
indicate that acetazolamide (a diuretic) may be taken
before ascent as a preventative measure for AMS.
Paying attention to diet can also help prevent altitude sickness. Water loss is a problem at higher altitudes, so climbers should drink ample water (enough to
produce copious amounts of relatively light-colored or
clear urine). Alcohol and large amounts of salt should
be avoided. Eating frequent small, high-carbohydrate
snacks (for example, fruits, jams and starchy foods)
can help, especially in the first few days of climbing.