Definition
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common form
of dementia, a neurologic disease characterized by loss
of mental ability severe enough to interfere with normal
activities of daily living, lasting at least six months, and
not present from birth. AD usually occurs in old age,
and is marked by a decline in cognitive functions such as
remembering, reasoning, and planning.
Description
A person with AD usually has a gradual decline in
mental functions, often beginning with slight memory
loss, followed by losses in the ability to maintain
employment, to plan and execute familiar tasks, and to
reason and exercise judgment. Communication ability,
mood, and personality also may be affected. Most
people who have AD die within eight years of their
diagnosis, although the interval may be as short as one
year or as long as 20 years. AD is the fourth leading
cause of death in adults after heart disease, cancer, and
stroke.
Between two and four million Americans have
AD; that number is expected to grow to as many as
14 million by the middle of the 21st century as the
population ages. While a small number of people in
their 40s and 50s develop the disease (called earlyonset AD), AD predominantly affects the elderly.
AD affects about 3% of all people between ages 65
and 74, about 19% of those between 75 and 84, and
about 47% of those over 85. Slightly more women
than men are affected with AD, but this may be
because women tend to live longer, leaving a higher
proportion of women in the most affected age groups.
The cost of caring for a person with AD is considerable. The annual cost of caring for one AD
patient in 1998 was estimated as about $18,400 for a
patient with mild AD, $30,100 for a patient with moderate AD, and $36,100 for a patient with severe AD.
The annual direct and indirect costs of caring for AD
patients in the United States was estimated to be as
much as $100 billion. Slightly more than half of people
with AD are cared for at home, while the remainder
are cared for in a variety of health care institutions.
Causes and symptoms
Causes
The cause or causes of Alzheimer’s disease are largely unknown, though some forms have genetic links.
Some strong leads have been found through recent
research, however, and these have given some theoretical support to several new experimental treatments.
At first AD destroys neurons (nerve cells) in parts
of the brain that control memory, including the
hippocampus, which is a structure deep in the deep
that controls short-term memory. As these neurons
in the hippocampus stop functioning, the person’s
short-term memory fails, and the ability to perform
familiar tasks decreases. Later AD affects the cerebral
cortex, particularly the areas responsible for language
and reasoning. Many language skills are lost and the
ability to make judgments is affected. Personality
changes occur, which may include emotional outbursts, wandering, and agitation. The severity of
these changes increases with disease progression.
Eventually many other areas of the brain become
involved, the brain regions affected atrophy (shrink
and lose function), and the person with AD becomes
bedridden, incontinent, helpless, and non-responsive.
Autopsy of a person with AD shows that the
regions of the brain affected by the disease become
clogged with two abnormal structures, called neurofibrillary tangles and amyloid plaques. Neurofibrillary
tangles are twisted masses of protein fibers inside nerve
cells, or neurons. In AD, tau proteins, which normally
help bind and stabilize parts of neurons, are changed
chemically, become twisted and tangled, and no longer
can stabilize the neurons. Amyloid plaques consist of
insoluble deposits of beta-amyloid, (a protein fragment
from a larger protein called amyloid precursor protein
(APP), mixed with parts of neurons and non-nerve
cells. Plaques are found in the spaces between the
nerve cells of the brain. While it is not clear exactly
how these structures cause problems, many researchers
believe that their formation is responsible for the mental changes of AD, presumably by interfering with the
normal communication between neurons in the brain
and later leading to the death of neurons. By 2000,
three drugs for the treatment of AD symptoms were
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA). They act by increasing the level of chemical
signaling molecules in the brain, known as neurotransmitters, to make up for this decreased communication
ability. All act by inhibiting the activity of acetylcholinesterase, which is an enzyme that breaks down
acetylcholine, an important neurotransmitter released
by neurons that is necessary for cognitive function.
These drugs modestly increase cognition and improve
one’s ability to perform normal activities of daily living.
Exactly what triggers the formation of plaques
and tangles and the development of AD is unknown.
AD likely results from many interrelated factors,
including genetic, environmental, and others not yet
identified. Two types of AD exist: familial AD (FAD),
which is a rare autosomal dominant inherited disease,
and sporadic AD, with no obvious inheritance pattern. AD also is described in terms of age at onset, with
early onset AD occurring in people younger than 65,
and late-onset occurring in those 65 and older. Early
onset AD comprises about 5-10 % of AD cases and
affects people aged 30 to 60. Some cases of early onset
AD are inherited and are common in some families.
Early-onset AD often progresses faster than the more
common late-onset type.
All cases of FAD, which is relatively uncommon,
that have been identified to date are the early onset
type. As many as 50% of FAD cases are known to
be caused by three genes located on three different
chromosomes. Some families have mutations in the
APP gene located on chromosome 21, which causes
the production of abnormal APP protein. Others
have mutations in a gene called presenilin 1 located
on chromosome 14, which causes the production of
abnormal presenilin 1 protein, and others have mutations in a similar gene called presenilin 2 located
on chromosome 1, which causes production of abnormal presenilin 2. Presenilin 1 may be one of the
enzymes that clips APP into beta-amyloid; it also
may be important in the synaptic connections between
brain cells.
There is no evidence that the mutated genes that
cause early onset FAD also cause late onset AD, but
genetics appears to play a role in this more common
form of AD. Discovered by researchers at Duke
University in the early 1990s, potentially the most
important genetic link to AD was on chromosome 19.
A gene on this chromosome, called APOE (apolipoprotein E), codes for a protein involved in transporting
lipids into neurons. APOE occurs in at least three forms
(alleles), called APOE e2, APOE e3, and APOE e4.
Each person inherits one APOE from each parent, and
therefore can either have one copy of two different
forms, or two copies of one. The relatively rare APOE
e2 appears to protect some people from AD, as it seems
to be associated with a lower risk of AD and a later age
of onset if AD develops. APOE e3 is the most common
version found in the general population, and only
appears to have a neutral role in AD. However, APOE
e4 appears to increase the risk of developing late onset
AD with the inheritance of one or two copies of APOE
e4. Compared to those without APOE e4, people with
one copy are about three times as likely to develop lateonset AD, and those with two copies are almost four
times as likely to do so. Having APOE e4 also can lower
the age of onset by as much as 17 years. However,
APOE e4 only increases the risk of developing AD
and does not cause it, as not everyone with APOE e4
develops AD, and people without it can still have the
disease. Why APOE e4 increases the chances of developing AD is not known with certainty. However, one
theory is that APOE e4 facilitates beta-amyloid buildup
in plaques, thus contributing to the lowering of the age
of onset of AD; other theories involve interactions with
cholesterol levels and effects on nerve cell death independent of its effects on plaque buildup. In 2000, four
new AD-related regions in the human genome were
identified, where one out of several hundred genes in
each of these regions may be a risk factor gene for AD.
These genes, which are not yet identified, appear to
make a contribution to the risk of developing lateonset AD that is at least as important as APOE e4.
Other non-genetic factors have been studied in
relation to the causes of AD. Inflammation of the
brain may play a role in development of AD, and use
of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
were once thought to reduce the risk of developing
AD. Other agents once thought to reduce chances of
dementia are now thought to increase its risk. In 2002,
hormone replacement therapy (HRT), which combines
estrogen and progestogen, was found to double the
risk of developing dementia in postmenopausal
women. Highly reactive molecular fragments called
free radicals damage cells of all kinds, especially
brain cells, which have smaller supplies of protective
antioxidants thought to protect against free radical
damage. Vitamin E is one such antioxidant, and its
use in AD may be of possible theoretical benefit.
While the ultimate cause or causes of Alzheimer’s
disease still are unknown, there are several risk factors
that increase a person’s likelihood of developing the
disease. The most significant one is, of course, age;
older people develop AD at much higher rates than
younger ones. There is some evidence that strokes and
AD may be linked, with small strokes that go undetected clinically contributing to the injury of neurons.
A 2003 Dutch study reported that symptomless, unnoticed strokes could double the risk of AD and other
dementias. Blood cholesterol levels also may be
important. Scientists have shown that high blood
cholesterol levels in special breeds of genetically
engineered (transgenic) mice may increase the rate of
plaque deposition. There are also parallels between
AD and other progressive neurodegenerative disorders that cause dementia, including prion diseases,
Parkinson’s disease, and Huntington’s disease.
Numerous epidemiological studies of populations
also are being conducted to learn more about whether
and to what extent early life events, socioeconomic
factors, and ethnicity have an impact on the development of AD. For example, a 2003 report showed that
the more formal education a person has, the better his
or her memory is, despite presence of AD. Other studies have related education level or participation in
leisure activities such as playing cards or doing crossword puzzles to delayed onset of AD.
Many environmental factors have been suspected
of contributing to AD, but epidemiological population studies have not borne out these links. Among
these have been pollutants in drinking water, aluminum from commercial products, and metal dental fillings. To date, none of these factors has been shown to
cause AD or increase its likelihood. Further research
may yet turn up links to other environmental factors.
Symptoms
The symptoms of Alzheimer’s disease begin gradually, usually with memory lapses. Occasional memory lapses are of course common to everyone, and do
not by themselves signify any change in cognitive
function. The person with AD may begin with only
the routine sort of memory lapse — forgetting where
the car keys are — but progress to more profound or
disturbing losses, such as forgetting that he or she can
even drive a car. Becoming lost or disoriented on a walk
around the neighborhood becomes more likely as the
disease progresses. A person with AD may forget the
names of family members, or forget what was said at
the beginning of a sentence by the time he hears the end.
As AD progresses, other symptoms appear,
including inability to perform routine tasks, loss of
judgment, and personality or behavior changes.
Some people with AD have trouble sleeping and may
suffer from confusion or agitation in the evening
(‘‘sunsetting’’ or Sundowner’s Syndrome). In some
cases, people with AD repeat the same ideas, movements, words, or thoughts. In the final stages people
may have severe problems with eating, communicating, and controlling their bladder and bowel functions.
The Alzheimer’s Association has developed a list
of 10 warning signs of AD. A person with several of
these symptoms should see a physician for a thorough
evaluation:

memory loss that affects job skills

difficulty performing familiar tasks

problems with language

disorientation of time and place
poor or decreased judgment

problems with abstract thinking

misplacing things

changes in mood or behavior

changes in personality

loss of initiative
Other types of dementia, including some that are
reversible, can cause similar symptoms. It is important for the person with these symptoms to be evaluated by a professional who can weigh the possibility
that his or her symptoms may have another cause.
Approximately 20% of those originally suspected of
having AD turn out to have some other disorder;
about half of these cases are treatable.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease is complex, and
may require office visits to several different specialists
over several months before a diagnosis can be made.
While a confident provisional diagnosis may be made
in most cases after thorough testing, AD cannot be
diagnosed definitively until autopsy examination of
the brain for plaques and neurofibrillary tangles.
The diagnosis of AD begins with a thorough
physical exam and complete medical history. Except
in the disease’s earliest stages, accurate history from
family members or caregivers is essential. Since there
are both prescription and over-the-counter drugs
that can cause the same mental changes as AD, a
careful review of the patient’s drug, medicine, and
alcohol use is important. AD-like symptoms also
can be provoked by other medical conditions, including tumors, infection, and dementia caused by mild
strokes (multi-infarct dementia). These possibilities
must be ruled out as well through appropriate blood
and urine tests, brain magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI), positron emission tomography (PET) or single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT)
scans, tests of the brain’s electrical activity (electroencephalographs or EEGs), or other tests. Several
types of oral and written tests are used to aid in the
AD diagnosis and to follow its progression, including
tests of mental status, functional abilities, memory,
and concentration. Still, the neurologic exam is
normal in most patients in early stages.
One of the most important parts of the diagnostic
process is to evaluate the patient for depression and
delirium, since each of these can be present with AD, or
may be mistaken for it. (Delirium involves a decreased
consciousness or awareness of one’s environment.)
Depression and memory loss both are common
in the elderly, and the combination of the often can
be mistaken for AD. On the other hand, depression
can be a risk factor for AD. A 2003 study showed that
a history of depressive symptoms can be associated
with nearly twice the risk of eventually developing
AD. Depression can be treated with drugs, although
some antidepressants can worsen dementia if it is
present, further complicating both diagnosis and
treatment.
An early and accurate diagnosis of AD is important in developing strategies for managing symptoms
and for helping patients and their families planning
for the future and pursuing care options while the
patient can still take part in the decision-making
process.
A genetic test for the APOE e4 gene is available,
but is not used for diagnosis, since possessing even two
copies does not ensure that a person will develop AD.
In addition, access to genetic information could affect
the insurability of a patient if disclosed, and also affect
employment status and legal rights.
Treatment
Alzheimer’s disease is presently incurable. Recent
reports show that prompt intervention can slow decline
from AD. The use of medications mentioned below as
early as possible in the course of AD can help people
with the disease maintain independent function as long
as possible. The remaining treatment for a person with
AD is good nursing care, providing both physical and
emotional support for a person who is gradually able to
do less and less for himself, and whose behavior is
becoming more and more erratic. Modifications of the
home to increase safety and security often are necessary. The caregiver also needs support to prevent anger,
despair, and burnout from becoming overwhelming.
Becoming familiar with the issues likely to lie ahead,
and considering the appropriate financial and legal
issues early on, can help both the patient and family
cope with the difficult process of the disease. Regular
medical care by a practitioner with a non-defeatist
attitude toward AD is important so that illnesses such
as urinary or respiratory infections can be diagnosed
and treated properly, rather than being incorrectly
attributed to the inevitable decline seen in AD.
People with AD often are depressed or anxious,
and may suffer from sleeplessness, poor nutrition, and
general poor health. Each of these conditions is treatable to some degree. It is important for the person
with AD to eat well and continue to exercise.
Professional advice from a nutritionist may be useful
to provide healthy, easy-to-prepare meals. Finger
foods may be preferable to those requiring utensils to
be eaten. Regular exercise (supervised if necessary for
safety) promotes overall health. A calm, structured
environment with simple orientation aids (such as
calendars and clocks) may reduce anxiety and increase
safety. Other psychiatric symptoms, such as depression, anxiety, hallucinations (seeing or hearing things
that aren’t there), and delusions (false beliefs) may be
treated with drugs if necessary.
Drugs
As of 2003, four drugs—tacrine (Cognex), donepezil hydrochloride (Aricept), and rivastigmine
(Exelon)—have been approved by the FDA for its
treatment. Tacrine has been shown to be effective for
improving memory skills, but only in patients with
mild-to-moderate AD, and even then in less than half
of those who take it. Its beneficial effects are usually
mild and temporary, but it may delay the need for
nursing home admission. The most significant side
effect is an increase in a liver enzyme known as alanine
aminotransferase, or ALT. Patients taking tacrine
must have a weekly blood test to monitor their ALT
levels. Other frequent side effects include nausea,
vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, indigestion, and
skin rash. The cost of tacrine was about $125 per
month in early 1998, with additional costs for the
weekly blood monitoring. Despite its high cost, tacrine
appears to be cost-effective for those who respond to
it, since it may decrease the number of months a
patient needs nursing care. Donepezil is the drug
most commonly used to treat mild to moderate symptoms of AD, although it only helps some patients for
periods of time ranging from months to about two
years. Donepezil has two advantages over tacrine: it
has fewer side effects, and it can be given once daily
rather than three times daily. Donepezil does not
appear to affect liver enzymes, and therefore does
not require weekly blood tests. The frequency of
abdominal side effects is also lower. The monthly
cost is approximately the same. Rivastigmine,
approved for use in April of 2000, has been shown to
improve the ability of patients to carry out daily activities, such as eating and dressing, decrease behavioral
symptoms such as delusions and agitation, and improve
cognitive functions such as thinking, memory, and
speaking. The cost is similar to those of the other
two drugs. However, none of these three drugs stops
or reverses the progression of AD. Galantamine
(Reminyl) works in the early and moderates stages
of AD. It has fewer side effects than other drugs,
with the exception of donepezil and must be taken
twice a day. Three other drugs were being tested for
AD treatment in mid-2003.
Estrogen, the female sex hormone, is widely prescribed for post-menopausal women to prevent osteoporosis. Studies once showed that estrogen was
beneficial to women with AD, but in 2003, a large
clinical trial called the Women’s Health Initiative
showed dementia among other negative effects of
combined estrogen therapy.
Preliminary studies once suggested a reduced risk
for developing AD in elderly people who regularly used
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs),
including aspirin, ibuprofen, and naproxen, although
not acetaminophen. However, an important study
published in 2003 showed that NSAIDs were not effective in preventing or slowing the progression of AD.
The study authors recommended that people stop
taking NSAIDs to slow dementia.
Antioxidants, which act to inhibit and protect
against oxidative damage caused by free radicals, have
been shown to inhibit toxic effects of beta-amyloid in
tissue culture. Therefore, research is being conducted
to see whether antioxidants may delay or prevent AD.
Another antioxidant, vitamin E, is also thought
to delay AD onset. Hoever, it is not yet clear whether
this is due to the specific action of vitamin E on brain
cells, or to an increase in the overall health of those
taking it.
Drugs such as antidepressants, anti-psychotics,
and sedatives are used to treat the behavioral symptoms (agitation, aggression, wandering, and sleep disorders) of AD. Research is being conducted to search
for better treatments, including non-drug approaches
for AD patients.
Nursing care and safety
The person with Alzheimer’s disease will gradually lose the ability to dress, groom, feed, bathe, or use
the toilet by himself; in the later stages of the disease,
he may be unable to move or speak. In addition, the
person’s behavior becomes increasingly erratic. A
tendency to wander may make it difficult to leave
him unattended for even a few minutes and make
even the home a potentially dangerous place. In
addition, some people with AD may exhibit inappropriate sexual behaviors.
The nursing care required for a person with AD is
well within the abilities of most people to learn. The
difficulty for many caregivers comes in the constant
but unpredictable nature of the demands put on them.
In addition, the personality changes undergone by a
person with AD can be heartbreaking for family members as a loved one deteriorates, seeming to become a
different person. Not all people with AD develop
negative behaviors. Some become quite gentle, and
spend increasing amounts of time in dreamlike states.
A loss of good grooming may be one of the early
symptoms of AD. Mismatched clothing, unkempt hair,
and decreased interest in personal hygiene become
more common. Caregivers, especially spouses, may
find these changes socially embarrassing and difficult
to cope with. The caregiver usually will need to spend
increasing amounts of time on grooming to compensate
for the loss of attention from the patient, although
some adjustment of expectations (while maintaining
cleanliness) is often needed as the disease progresses.
Proper nutrition is important for a person with
AD, and may require assisted feeding early on, to
make sure the person is taking in enough nutrients.
Later on, as movement and swallowing become difficult, a feeding tube may be placed into the stomach
through the abdominal wall. A feeding tube requires
more attention, but is generally easy to care for if the
patient is not resistant to its use.
For many caregivers, incontinence becomes the
most difficult problem to deal with at home, and is a
principal reason for pursuing nursing home care. In
the early stages, limiting fluid intake and increasing
the frequency of toileting can help. Careful attention
to hygiene is important to prevent skin irritation and
infection from soiled clothing.
Persons with dementia must deal with six basic
safety concerns: injury from falls, injury from ingesting dangerous substances, leaving the home and getting lost, injury to self or others from sharp objects,
fire or burns, and the inability to respond rapidly to
crisis situations. In all cases, a person diagnosed with
AD should no longer be allowed to drive, because of
the increased potential for accidents and the increased
likelihood of wandering very far from home while
disoriented. In the home, simple measures such as
grab bars in the bathroom, bed rails on the bed, and
easily negotiable passageways can greatly increase
safety. Electrical appliances should be unplugged and
put away when not in use, and matches, lighters, knives, or weapons should be stored safely out of reach.
The hot water heater temperature may be set lower
to prevent accidental scalding. A list of emergency
numbers, including the poison control center and the
hospital emergency room, should be posted by the
phone. As the disease progresses, caregivers need to
periodically reevaluate the physical safety of the home
and introduce new strategies for continued safety.
Care for the caregiver
Family members or others caring for a person with
AD have an extremely difficult and stressful job, which
becomes harder as the disease progresses. Dementia
caregivers spend significantly more time on caregiving
than do people providing care for those with other
types of illnesses. This type of caregiving also has a
greater impact in terms of employment complications,
caregiver strain, mental and physical health problems,
time for leisure and other family members, and family
conflict than do other types of caregiving. It is common
for AD caregivers to develop feelings of anger, resentment, guilt, and hopelessness, in addition to the sorrow
they feel for their loved one and for themselves.
Depression is an extremely common consequence of
being a full-time caregiver for a person with AD.
Support groups are an important way to deal with the
stress of caregiving. Becoming a member of an AD
caregivers’ support group can be one of the most
important things a family member does, not only for
him or herself, but for the person with AD as well. The
location and contact numbers for AD caregiver support groups are available from the Alzheimer’s
Association; they also may be available through a
local social service agency, the patient’s physician, or
pharmaceutical companies that manufacture the drugs
used to treat AD. Medical treatment for depression
may be an important adjunct to group support.
Outside help, nursing homes, and governmental
assistance
Most families eventually need outside help to
relieve some of the burden of around-the-clock care
for a person with AD. Personal care assistants, either
volunteer or paid, may be available through local social
service agencies. Adult daycare facilities are becoming
increasingly common. Meal delivery, shopping assistance, or respite care may be available as well.
Providing the total care required by a person
with late-stage AD can become an overwhelming
burden for a family, even with outside help. At this
stage, many families consider nursing home care.
This decision often is one of the most difficult for
the family, since it is often seen as an abandonment of
the loved one and a failure of the family. Careful
counseling with a sympathetic physician, clergy, or
other trusted adviser may ease the difficulties of this
transition. Selecting a nursing home may require a
difficult balancing of cost, services, location, and
availability. Keeping the entire family involved in
the decision may help prevent further stress from
developing later on.
Several federal government programs may ease the
cost of caring for a person with AD, including Social
Security Disability, Medicare, and Supplemental
Security Income. Each of these programs may provide
some assistance for care, medication, or other costs,
but none of them will pay for nursing home care indefinitely. Medicaid is a state-funded program that may
provide for some or all of the cost of nursing home care,
although there are important restrictions. Details of
the benefits and eligibility requirements of these programs are available through the local Social Security
or Medicaid office, or from local social service agencies.
Private long-term care insurance, special ‘‘reverse
mortgages,’’ viatical insurance, and other financial
devices are other ways of paying for care for those
with the appropriate financial situations. Further
information on these options may be available
through resources listed below.
Alternative treatment
Several substances are currently being tested
for their ability to slow the progress of Alzheimer’s
disease. These include acetylcarnitine, a supplement
that acts on the cellular energy structures known as
mitochondria. Ginkgo extract, derived from the leaves
of the Ginkgo biloba tree, appears to have antioxidant
as well as anti-inflammatory and anticoagulant properties. Ginkgo extract has been used for many years
in China and is widely prescribed in Europe for treatment of circulatory problems. A 1997 study of patients
with dementia seemed to show that ginkgo extract
could improve their symptoms, though the study was
criticized for certain flaws in its method. Large scale
follow-up studies are being conducted to determine
whether Ginkgo extract can prevent or delay the
development of AD. Ginkgo extract is available in
many health food or nutritional supplement stores.
Some alternative practitioners also advise people
with AD to take supplements of phosphatidylcholine,
vitamin B12, gotu kola, ginseng, St. Johnos Wort, ˜
rosemary, saiko-keishi-to-shakuyaku (A Japanese
herbal mixture), and folic acid.
Prognosis
While Alzheimer’s disease may not be the direct
cause of death, the generally poorer health of a person
with AD increases the risk of life-threatening infection, including pneumonia. In addition, other diseases
common in old age–cancer, stroke, and heart disease–
may lead to more severe consequences in a person with
AD. On average, people with AD live eight years past
their diagnosis, with a range from one to 20 years.
Prevention
Currently, there is no sure way to prevent
Alzheimer’s disease. treatments discussed above may
eventually be proven to reduce the risk of developing
the disease. Avoiding risks such as hormone replacement therapy may help prevent development of AD.
Research on the prevention of AD is focusing on
blocking the production of amyloid in the brain as well
as breaking down beta-amyloid once it is released
from cells but before it has a chance to aggregate
into insoluble plaques. There also are promising
studies being conducted to develop an AD vaccine,
where immune responses may result in the elimination
of the formation of amyloid plaques.
The Alzheimer’s Disease Research Centers
(ADCs) program promotes research, training and
education, technology transfer, and multicenter and
cooperative studies in AD, other dementias, and normal brain aging. Each ADC enrolls and performs
studies on AD patients and healthy older people.
Persons can participate in research protocols and
clinical drug trials at these centers. Data from the
ADCs as well as from other sources are coordinated
and made available for use by researchers at the
National Alzheimer’s Coordinating Center, established in 1999.