Definition
Amebiasis is an infectious disease caused by a
parasitic one-celled microorganism (protozoan) called
Entamoeba histolytica. Persons with amebiasis may
experience a wide range of symptoms, including diarrhea, fever, and cramps. The disease may also affect
the intestines, liver, or other parts of the body.
Description
Amebiasis, also known as amebic dysentery, is one
of the most common parasitic diseases occurring in
humans, with an estimated 500 million new cases each
year. It occurs most frequently in tropical and subtropical areas where living conditions are crowded, with
inadequate sanitation. Although most cases of amebiasis occur in persons who carry the disease but do
not exhibit any symptoms (asymptomatic), as many as
100,000 people die of amebiasis each year. In the
United States, between 1 and 5% of the general population will develop amebiasis in any given year, while
male homosexuals, migrant workers, institutionalized
people, and recent immigrants develop amebiasis at a
higher rate.
Human beings are the only known host of the
amebiasis organism, and all groups of people, regardless
of age or sex, can become affected. Amebiasis is primarily spread in food and water that has been contaminated
by human feces but is also spread by person-to-person
contact. The number of cases is typically limited, but
regional outbreaks can occur in areas where human
feces are used as fertilizer for crops, or in cities with
water supplies contaminated with human feces.
Causes and symptoms
Recently, it has been discovered that persons
with symptom-causing amebiasis are infected with
Entamoeba histolytica, and those individuals who
exhibit no symptoms are actually infected with an
almost identical-looking ameba called Entamoeba
dispar. During their life cycles, the amebas exist in
two very different forms: the infective cyst or
capsuled form, which cannot move but can survive
outside the human body because of its protective
covering, and the disease-producing form, the
trophozoite, which although capable of moving, cannot survive once excreted in the feces and, therefore,
cannot infect others. The disease is most commonly
transmitted when a person eats food or drinks water
containing E. histolytica cysts from human feces. In
the digestive tract the cysts are transported to the
intestine where the walls of the cysts are broken
open by digestive secretions, releasing the mobile
trophozoites. Once released within the intestine, the
trophozoites multiply by feeding on intestinal bacteria or by invading the lining of the large intestine.
Within the lining of the large intestine, the
trophozoites secrete a substance that destroys intestinal tissue and creates a distinctive bottle-shaped
sore (ulcer). The trophozoites may remain inside the
intestine, in the intestinal wall, or may break through
the intestinal wall and be carried by the blood to the
liver, lungs, brain, or other organs. Trophozoites that
remain in the intestines eventually form new cysts
that are carried through the digestive tract and
excreted in the feces. Under favorable temperature
and humidity conditions, the cysts can survive in
soil or water for weeks to months, ready to begin
the cycle again.
Although 90% of cases of amebiasis in the United
States are mild, pregnant women, children under two
years of age, the elderly, malnourished individuals,
and people whose immune systems may be compressed,
such as cancer or AIDS patients and those individuals
taking prescription medications that suppress the
immune system, are at a greater risk for developing a
severe infection.
The signs and symptoms of amebiasis vary
according to the location and severity of the infection
and are classified as follows:
Intestinal amebiasis
Intestinal amebiasis can be subdivided into several
categories:
ASYMPTOMATIC INFECTION. Most persons with
amebiasis have no noticeable symptoms. Even though
these individuals may not feel ill, they are still capable
of infecting others by person-to-person contact or by
contaminating food or water with cysts that others
may ingest, for example, by preparing food with
unwashed hands.
CHRONIC NON-DYSENTERIC INFECTION. Individuals may experience symptoms over a long period
of time during a chronic amebiasis infection and
experience recurrent episodes of diarrhea that last
from one to four weeks and recur over a period of
years. These patients may also suffer from abdominal
cramps, fatigue, and weight loss.
AMEBIC DYSENTERY. In severe cases of intestinal
amebiasis, the organism invades the lining of the
intestine, producing sores (ulcers), bloody diarrhea,
severe abdominal cramps, vomiting, chills, and
fevers as high as 104-1058F (40-40.68C). In addition,
a case of acute amebic dysentery may cause complications, including inflammation of the appendix
(appendicitis), a tear in the intestinal wall (perforation), or a sudden, severe inflammation of the colon
(fulminating colitis).AMEBOMA. An ameboma is a mass of tissue in the
bowel that is formed by the amebiasis organism. It can
result from either chronic intestinal infection or acute
amebic dysentery. Amebomas may produce symptoms that mimic cancer or other intestinal diseases.
PERIANAL ULCERS. Intestinal amebiasis may produce skin infections in the area around the patient’s
anus (perianal). These ulcerated areas have a
‘‘punched-out’’ appearance and are painful to the touch.
Extraintestinal amebiasis
Extraintestinal amebiasis accounts for approximately 10% of all reported amebiasis cases and includes
all forms of the disease that affect other organs.
The most common form of extraintestinal amebiasis is amebic abscess of the liver. In the United States,
amebic liver abscesses occur most frequently in young
Hispanic adults. An amebic liver abscess can result
from direct infection of the liver by E. histolytica or as
a complication of intestinal amebiasis. Patients with an
amebic abscess of the liver complain of pain in the chest
or abdomen, fever, nausea, and tenderness on the right
side directly above the liver.
Other forms of extraintestinal amebiasis, though
rare, include infections of the lungs, chest cavity,
brain, or genitals. These are extremely serious and
have a relatively high mortality rate.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of amebiasis is complicated, partly
because the disease can affect several areas of the
body and can range from exhibiting few, if any, symptoms to being severe, or even life-threatening. In most
cases, a physician will consider a diagnosis of amebiasis when a patient has a combination of symptoms, in
particular, diarrhea and a possible history of recent
exposure to amebiasis through travel, contact with
infected persons, or anal intercourse.
It is vital to distinguish between amebiasis and
another disease, inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
that produces similar symptoms because, if diagnosed
incorrectly, drugs that are given to treat IBD can
encourage the growth and spread of the amebiasis
organism. Because of the serious consequences of
misdiagnosis, potential cases of IBD must be confirmed with multiple stool samples and blood tests,
and a procedure involving a visual inspection of the
intestinal wall using a thin lighted, tubular instrument
(sigmoidoscopy) to rule out amebiasis.
A diagnosis of amebiasis may be confirmed by one
or more tests, depending on the location of the disease.
Stool examination
This test involves microscopically examining a
stool sample for the presence of cysts and/or trophozoites of E. histolytica and not one of the many other
intestinal amebas that are often found but that do not
cause disease. A series of three stool tests is approximately 90% accurate in confirming a diagnosis of
amebic dysentery. Unfortunately, however, the stool
test is not useful in diagnosing amebomas or extraintestinal infections.
Sigmoidoscopy
Sigmoidoscopy is a useful diagnostic procedure in
which a thin, flexible, lighted instrument, called a
sigmoidoscope, is used to visually examine the lower
part of the large intestine for amebic ulcers and take
tissue or fluid samples from the intestinal lining.
Blood tests
Although tests designed to detect a specific
protein produced in response to amebiasis infection
(antibody) are capable of detecting only about 10%
of cases of mild amebiasis, these tests are extremely
useful in confirming 95% of dysentery diagnoses
and 98% of liver abscess diagnoses. Blood serum will
usually test positive for antibody within a week of
symptom onset. Blood testing, however, cannot
always distinguish between a current or past infection
since the antibodies may be detectable in the blood
for as long as 10 years following initial infection.
Imaging studies
A number of sophisticated imaging techniques,
such as computed tomography scans (CT), magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), and ultrasound, can be
used to determine whether a liver abscess is present.
Once located, a physician may then use a fine needle
to withdraw a sample of tissue to determine whether
the abscess is indeed caused by an amebic infection.
Treatment
Asymptomatic or mild cases of amebiasis may
require no treatment. However, because of the
potential for disease spread, amebiasis is generally
treated with a medication to kill the disease-causing
amebas. More severe cases of amebic dysentery are
additionally treated by replacing lost fluid and
blood. Patients with an amebic liver abscess will
also require hospitalization and bed rest. For those
cases of extraintestinal amebiasis, treatment can be
complicated because different drugs may be required
to eliminate the parasite, based on the location of
the infection within the body. Drugs used to treat
amebiasis, called amebicides, are divided into two
categories:
Luminal amebicides
These drugs get their name because they act on
organisms within the inner cavity (lumen) of the
bowel. They include diloxanide furoate, iodoquinol,
metronidazole, and paromomycin.
Tissue amebicides
Tissue amebicides are used to treat infections in
the liver and other body tissues and include emetine,
dehydroemetine, metronidazole, and chloroquine.
Because these drugs have potentially serious side
effects, patients given emetine or dehydroemetine
require bed rest and heart monitoring. Chloroquine
has been found to be the most useful drug for treating
amebic liver abscess. Patients taking metronidazole
must avoid alcohol because the drug-alcohol combination causes nausea, vomiting, and headache.
Most patients are given a combination of luminal
and tissue amebicides over a treatment period of seven
to ten days. Follow-up care includes periodic stool
examinations beginning two to four weeks after the
end of medication treatment to check the effectiveness
of drug therapy.
Prognosis
The prognosis depends on the location of the
infection and the patient’s general health prior to
infection. The prognosis is generally good, although
the mortality rate is higher for patients with ameboma,
perforation of the bowel, and liver infection. Patients
who develop fulminant colitis have the most serious
prognosis, with over 50% mortality.
Prevention
There are no immunization procedures or medications that can be taken prior to potential exposure to
prevent amebiasis. Moreover, people who have had
the disease can become reinfected. Prevention requires
effective personal and community hygiene.
Specific safeguards include the following:

Purification of drinking water. Water can be purified
by filtering, boiling, or treatment with iodine.

Proper food handling. Measures include protecting
food from contamination by flies, cooking food
properly, washing one’s hands after using the bathroom and before cooking or eating, and avoiding
foods that cannot be cooked or peeled when traveling in countries with high rates of amebiasis.

Careful disposal of human feces.

Monitoring the contacts of amebiasis patients. The
stools of family members and sexual partners of
infected persons should be tested for the presence of
cysts or trophozoites.