Definition
The absence of menstrual periods is called amenorrhea. Primary amenorrhea is the failure to start
having a period by the age of 16. Secondary amenorrhea is more common and refers to either the temporary or permanent ending of periods in a woman who
has menstruated normally in the past. Many women
miss a period occasionally. Amenorrhea occurs if a
woman misses three or more periods in a row.
Description
The absence of menstrual periods is a symptom,
not a disease. While the average age that menstruation
begins is 12, the range varies. The incidence of primary
amenorrhea in the United States is just 2.5%.
Some female athletes who participate in rowing,
long distance running, and cycling, may notice a few
missed periods. Women athletes at a particular risk for
developing amenorrhea include ballerinas and gymnasts, who typically exercise strenuously and eat poorly.
Causes and symptoms
Amenorrhea can have many causes. Primary amenorrhea can be the result of hormonal imbalances,
psychiatric disorders, eating disorders, malnutrition,
excessive thinness or fatness, rapid weight loss, body
fat content too low, and excessive physical conditioning. Intense physical training prior to puberty can delay
menarche (the onset of menstruation). Every year of
training can delay menarche for up to five months.
Some medications such as anti-depressants, tranquilizers, steroids, and heroin can induce amenorrhea.
Primary amenorrhea
However, the main cause is a delay in the beginning of puberty either from natural reasons (such as
heredity or poor nutrition) or because of a problem in
the endocrine system, such as a pituitary tumor or
hypothyroidism. An obstructed flow tract or inflammation in the uterus may be the presenting indications
of an underlying metabolic, endocrine, congenital or
gynecological disorder.
Typical causes of primary amenorrhea include:

excessive physical activity

drastic weight loss (such as occurs in anorexia or
bulimia)

extreme obesity

drugs (antidepressants or tranquilizers)

chronic illness

turner’s syndrome. (A chromosomal problem in place
at birth, relevant only in cases of primary amenorrhea)

the absence of a vagina or a uterus

imperforate hymen (lack of an opening to allow the
menstrual blood through)
Secondary amenorrhea
Some of the causes of primary amenorrhea can
also cause secondary amenorrhea – strenuous physical
activity, excessive weight loss, use of antidepressants
or tranquilizers, in particular. In adolescents, pregnancy and stress are two major causes. Missed periods
are usually caused in adolescents by stress and changes
in environment. Adolescents are especially prone to
irregular periods with fevers, weight loss, changes in
environment, or increased physical or athletic activity.
However, any cessation of periods for four months
should be evaluated.
The most common cause of seconardy amenorrhea is pregnancy. Also, a woman’s periods may halt
temporarily after she stops taking birth control pills.
This temporary halt usually lasts only for a month or
two, though in some cases it can last for a year or
more. Secondary amenorrhea may also be related to
hormonal problems related to stress, depression, anorexia nervosa or drugs, or it may be caused by any
condition affecting the ovaries, such as a tumor. The
cessation of menstruation also occurs permanently
after menopause or a hysterectomy.
Diagnosis
It may be difficult to find the cause of amenorrhea, but the exam should start with a pregnancy test;
pregnancy needs to be ruled out whenever a woman’s
period is two to three weeks overdue. Androgen
excess, estrogen deficiency, or other problems with
the endocrine system need to be checked. Prolactin in
the blood and the thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH)
should also be checked.
The diagnosis usually includes a patient history
and a physical exam (including a pelvic exam). If a
woman has missed three or more periods in a row, a
physician may recommend blood tests to measure
hormone levels, a scan of the skull to rule out the
possibility of a pituitary tumor, and ultrasound scans
of the abdomen and pelvis to rule out a tumor of the
adrenal gland or ovary.
Treatment
Treatment of amenorrhea depends on the cause.
Primary amenorrhea often requires no treatment, but
it’s alwaysimportant todiscover the causeof theproblem
in any case. Not all conditions can be treated, but any
underlying condition that is treatable should be treated.
If a hormonal imbalance is the problem, progesterone for one to two weeks every month or two may
correct the problem. With polycystic ovary syndrome,
birth control pills are often prescribed. A pituitary
tumor is treated with bromocriptine, a drug that reduces
certain hormone (prolactin) secretions. Weight loss may
bring on a period in an obese woman. Easing up on
excessive exercise and eating a proper diet may bring
on periods in teen athletes. In very rare cases, surgery
may be needed for women with ovarian or uterine cysts.
Prognosis
Prolonged amenorrhea can lead to infertility and
other medical problems such as osteoporosis (thinning
of the bones). If the halt in the normal period is caused
by stress or illness, periods should begin again when
the stress passes or the illness is treated. Amenorrhea
that occurs with discontinuing birth control pills
usually go away within six to eight weeks, although it
may take up to a year.
The prognosis for polycystic ovary disease
depends on the severity of the symptoms and the
treatment plan. Spironolactone, a drug that blocks
the production of male hormones, can help in reducing
body hair. If a woman wishes to become pregnant,
treatment with clomiphene may be required or, on
rare occasions, surgery on the ovaries.
Prevention
Primary amenorrhea caused by a congenital condition cannot be prevented. In general, however, women
should maintain a healthy diet, with plenty of exercise,
rest, and not too much stress, avoiding smoking and
substance abuse. Female athletes should be sure to eat a
balanced diet and rest and exercise normally. However,
many cases of amenorrhea cannot be prevented.