Definition
Amino acid disorder screening checks for inherited
disorders in amino acid metabolism. Tests are most
commonly done on newborns. Two tests are available,
one using a blood sample and the other a urine sample.
Purpose
Amino acid disorder screening is done in newborns, and sometimes children and adults, to detect
inborn errors in metabolism of amino acids. Twenty of
the 100 known amino acids are the main building
blocks for human proteins. Proteins regulate every
aspect of cellular function. Of these 20 amino acids,
ten are not made by the body and must be acquired
through diet. Congenital (present at birth) enzyme deficiencies that affect amino acid metabolism or congenital
abnormalities in the amino acid transport system of
the kidneys creates a condition called aminoaciduria.
Screening is especially important in newborns.
Some congenital amino acid metabolic defects cause
mental retardation that can prevented with prompt
treatment of the newborn. One of the best known
examples of this is phenylketonuria (PKU). This is an
genetic error in metabolism of phenylalanine, an
amino acid found in milk. Individuals with PKU do
not produce the enzyme necessary to break down
phenylalanine.
PKU occurs in about one out of 16,000 live births
in the United States, but is more prevalent in caucasians and less prevalent in Ashkenazi Jews and African
Americans. Newborns in the United States are routinely screened for PKU by a blood test.
There are two types of aminoacidurias. Primary
or overflow aminoaciduria results from deficiencies in
the enzymes necessary to metabolize amino acids.
Overflow aminoaciduria is best detected by a blood
plasma test.
Secondary or renal aminoaciduria occurs because
of a congenital defect in the amino acid transport
system in the tubules of the kidneys. This produces
increased amino acids in the urine. Blood and urine
test in combination are used to determine if the aminoaciduria is of the overflow or renal type. Urine tests
are also used to monitor specific amino acid disorders.
Newborns are screened for amino acid disorders.
Young children with acidosis (accumulation of acid
in the body), severe vomiting and diarrhea, or urine
with an abnormal color or odor, are also screened
with a urine test for specific amino acid levels.
Precautions
Both blood and urine tests are simple tests that
can be done in a doctor’s office or clinic. These tests
can be done on even the youngest patients.
Description
Two types of amino acid screening tests are used
together to diagnose amino acid disorders.
Blood plasma screening
In the blood test, a medical technician draws a
small amount of blood from a baby’s heel. The procedure is rapid and relatively painless. Total time for the
test is less than ten minutes. The blood is sent to a
laboratory where results will be available in about
two days.
Urine test
In the urine test, the patient is asked to urinate
into a collecting cup. For an infant, the urine is collected in a pediatric urine collector. The process is
painless. The length of time the test takes is determined
by how long it takes the patient to urinate. Results also
take about two days.
Both these tests use thin layer chromatography to
separate the amino acids present. Using this technique, the amino acids form a characteristic patterns on
a glass plate coated with a thin layer of silica gel. This
pattern is then compared to the normal pattern to
determine if there are abnormalities.
Preparation
Before the blood test, the patient must not eat or
drink for four hours. Failure to fast will alter the
results of the test.
The patient should eat and drink normally before
the urine test. Some drugs may affect the results of the
urine test. The technician handling the urine sample
should be informed of any medications the patient is
taking. Mothers of breastfeeding infants should report
any medications they are taking, since these can pass
from mother to child in breast milk.
Aftercare
The blood screening is normally done first.
Depending on the results, it is followed by the urine
test. It takes both tests to distinguish between overflow and renal aminoaciduria. Also, if the results are
abnormal, a 24-hour urine test is performed along
with other tests to determine the levels of specific
amino acids. In the event of abnormal results, there
are many other tests that will be performed to determine
the specific amino acid involved in the abnormality.
Risks
There are no particular risks associated with
either of these tests. Occasionally minor bruising may
occur at the site where the blood was taken.
Normal results
The pattern of amino acid banding on the thin
layer chromatography plates will be normal.
Abnormal results
The blood plasma amino acid patternis abnormalin
overflow aminoaciduria and is normal in renal aminoaciduria. The pattern is abnormal in the urine test,
suggesting additional tests need to be done to determine
which amino acids are involved. In addition to PKU, a
variety of other amino acid metabolism disorders can
be detected by these tests, including tyrosinosis, histidinemia, maple syrup urine disease, hypervalinemia,
hyperprolinemia, and homocystinuria.