Definition
Aminoglycosides are a group of antibiotics that
are used to treat certain bacterial infections. This
group of antibiotics includes at least eight drugs:
amikacin, gentamicin, kanamycin, neomycin, netilmicin, paromomycin, streptomycin, and tobramycin.
All of these drugs have the same basic chemical
structure.
Purpose
Aminoglycosides are primarily used to combat
infections due to aerobic, Gram-negative bacteria.
These bacteria can be identified by their reaction to
Gram’s stain. In Gram’s staining, a film of material
containing the possible bacteria is placed on a glass
slide and dried. The slide is stained with crystal violet
for one minute, cleaned off with water and then placed
into a solution of Gram’s iodine solution for one
minute. The iodine solution is rinsed off and the slide
is immersed in 95% ethyl alcohol. The slide is then
stained again with reddish carbolfuchsin or safranine
for 30 seconds, rinsed in water, dried and examined.
Gram-positive bacteria retain the violet purple stain.
Gram-negative bacteria accept the red stain. Bacteria
that can successfully be combated with aminoglycosides include Pseudomonas, Acinetobacter, and
Enterobacter species, among others. Aminoglycosides
are also effective against mycobacteria, the bacteria
responsible for tuberculosis.
The aminoglycosides can be used against certain
Gram-positive bacteria, but are not typically
employed because other antibiotics are more effective
and have fewer side effects. Aminoglycosides are ineffective against anaerobic bacteria (bacteria that cannot grow in the presence of oxygen), viruses, and
fungi. And only one aminoglycoside, paromomycin,
is used against parasitic infection.
Like all other antibiotics, aminoglycosides are not
effective against influenza, the common cold, or other
viral infections.
Precautions
Pre-existing medical conditions–such as kidney
disease, eighth cranial nerve disease, myasthenia
gravis, and Parkinson’s disease–should be discussed
prior to taking any aminoglycosides. Pregnant
women are usually advised against taking aminoglycosides, because their infants may suffer damage to
their hearing, kidneys, or sense of balance. However,
those factors need to be considered alongside the
threat to the mother’s health and life in cases of
serious infection. Aminoglycosides do not pass into
breast milk to any great extent, so nursing mothers
may be prescribed aminoglycosides without injuring
their infants.
Description
Streptomycin, the first aminoglycoside, was
isolated from Streptomyces griseus in the mid-1940s.
This antibiotic was very effective against tuberculosis.
One of the main drawbacks to streptomycin is its
toxicity, especially to cells in the inner and middle ear
and the kidney. Furthermore, some strains of tuberculosis are resistant to treatment with streptomycin.
Therefore, medical researchers have put considerable
effort into identifying other antibiotics with streptomycin’s efficacy, but without its toxicity.
Aminoglycosides are absorbed very poorly from
the gastrointestinal tract; in fact, aminoglycosides
taken orally are excreted virtually unchanged and
undiminished in quantity. The route of drug administration depends on the type and location of the
infection being treated. The typical routes of administration are by intramuscular (injection into a muscle) or intravenous injection (injection into a vein),
irrigation, topical skin application, or inhalation.
If the infection being treated involves the central
nervous system, the drug can be injected into the
spinal canal.
The bactericidal ability of aminoglycosides has
not been fully explained. It is known that the drug
attaches to a bacterial cell wall and is drawn into the
cell via channels made up of the protein, porin. Once
inside the cell, the aminoglycoside attaches to the cell’s
ribosomes. Ribosomes are the intracellular structures
responsible for manufacturing proteins. This attachment either shuts down protein production or causes
the cell to produce abnormal, ineffective proteins. The
bacterial cell cannot survive with this impediment.
Antibiotic treatment using aminoglycosides may
pair the drug with a second type of antibiotic, usually
a beta-lactam or vancomycin, administered separately. Beta-lactams disrupt the integrity of the bacteria cell wall, making it more porous. The increased
porosity allows more of the aminoglycoside into the
bacteria cell.
Traditionally, aminoglycosides were administered
at even doses given throughout the day. It was thought
that a steady plasma concentration was necessary to
combat infection. However, this administration schedule is time and labor intensive. Furthermore, administering a single daily dose can be as effective, or more
effective, than several doses throughout the day.
Dosage depends on the patient’s age, weight, gender, and general health. Since the drug is cleared by the
kidneys, it is important to assess any underlying problems with kidney function. Kidney function is
assessed by measuring the blood levels of creatinine,
a protein normally found in the body. If these levels
are high, it is an indication that the kidneys may not be
functioning at an optimal rate and dosage will be
lowered accordingly.
Risks
Aminoglycosides have been shown to be toxic
to certain cells in the ears and in the kidneys.
Approximately 5-10% of the people who are
treated with aminoglycosides experience some side
effect, affecting their hearing, sense of balance, or
kidneys. However, in most cases the damage is minor
and reversible once medication is stopped.
If cells in the inner ear are damaged or destroyed,
an individual may experience a loss of balance and
feelings of dizziness. Damage to the middle ear may
result in hearing loss or tinnitus. Neomycin, kanamycin,
and amikacin are the most likely to cause problems with
hearing, and streptomycin and gentamicin carry the
greatest risk of causing vertigo and loss of balance.
Kidney damage, apparent with changes in urination
frequency or urine production, is most likely precipitated by neomycin, tobramycin, and gentamicin.
Young children and the elderly are at the greatest
risk of suffering side effects. Excessive dosage or poor
clearance of the drug from the body can be injurious at
any age.
Less common side effects include skin rashes and
itching. Very rarely, certain aminoglycosides may
cause difficulty in breathing, weakness, or drowsiness.
Gentamicin, when injected, may cause leg cramps,
skin rash, fever, or seizures.
If side effects linger or become worse after medication is stopped, it is advisable to seek medical advice.
Side effects that may be of concern include tinnitus or
loss of hearing, dizziness or loss of balance, changes in
urination frequency or urine production, increased
thirst, appetite loss, and nausea or vomiting.
Normal results
At the proper dosage and in the presence of gramnegative enteric (intestinal) bacteria, aminoglycosides
are very effective in treating an infection.
Abnormal results
In some cases, bacteria are resistant to antibiotics
that would normally kill them. This resistance
becomes apparent after repeated exposure to the antibiotic and arises from a mutation that alters the bacteria’s susceptibility to the drug. Various degrees of
resistance have been observed in bacteria that normally would be destroyed by aminoglycosides. In general, though, aminoglycoside effectiveness has held
up well over time.