Definition
Amniocentesis is a procedure used to diagnose fetal
defects in the early second trimester of pregnancy. A
sample of the amniotic fluid, which surrounds a fetus
in the womb, is collected through a pregnant woman’s
abdomen using a needle and syringe. Tests performed
on fetal cells found in the sample can reveal the presence
of many types of genetic disorders, thus allowing
doctors and prospective parents to make important
decisions about early treatment and intervention.
Purpose
Since the mid-1970s, amniocentesis has been used
routinely to test for Down syndrome, by far the most
common, nonhereditary, genetic birth defect, afflicting about one in every 1,000 babies. By 1997, approximately 800 different diagnostic tests were available,
most of them for hereditary genetic disorders such
as Tay-Sachs disease, sickle cell anemia, hemophilia,
muscular dystrophy and cystic fibrosis.
Amniocentesis, often called amnio, is recommended for women who will be older than 35 on
their due-date. It is also recommended for women
who have already borne children with birth defects,
or when either of the parents has a family history of a
birth defect for which a diagnostic test is available.
Another reason for the procedure is to confirm indications of Down syndrome and certain other defects
which may have shown up previously during routine
maternal blood screening.
The risk of bearing a child with a nonhereditary
genetic defect such as Down syndrome is directly
related to a woman’s age–the older the woman, the
greater the risk. Thirty-five is the recommended age to
begin amnio testing because that is the age at which the
risk of carrying a fetus with such a defect roughly
equals the risk of miscarriage caused by the procedure–about one in 200. At age 25, the risk of giving
birth to a child with this type of defect is about one in
1,400; by age 45 it increases to about one in 20. Nearly
half of all pregnant women over 35 in the United States
undergo amniocentesis and many younger women also
decide to have the procedure. Notably, some 75% of all
Down syndrome infants born in the United States each
year are to women younger than 35.
One of the most common reasons for performing
amniocentesis is an abnormal alpha-fetoprotein
(AFP) test. Alpha-fetoprotein is a protein produced
by the fetus and present in the mother’s blood. A
simple blood screening, usually conducted around
the 15th week of pregnancy, can determine the AFP
levels in the mother’s blood. Levels that are too high or
too low may signal possible fetal defects. Because this
test has a high false-positive rate, another test such as
amnio is recommended whenever the AFP levels fall
outside the normal range.
Amniocentesis is generally performed during the
16th week of pregnancy, with results usually available
within three weeks. It is possible to perform an amnio
as early as the 11th week but this is not usually
recommended because there appears to be an
increased risk of miscarriage when done at this time.
The advantage of early amnio and speedy results lies
in the extra time for decision making if a problem is
detected. Potential treatment of the fetus can begin
earlier. Important, also, is the fact that elective abortions are safer and less controversial the earlier they
are performed.
Precautions
As an invasive surgical procedure, amnio poses a
real, although small, risk to the health of a fetus.
Parents must weigh the potential value of the knowledge gained, or indeed the reassurance that all is well,
against the small risk of damaging what is in all probability a normal fetus. The serious emotional and
ethical dilemmas that adverse test results can bring
must also be considered. The decision to undergo
amnio is always a matter of personal choice.
Description
The word amniocentesis literally means ‘‘puncture
of the amnion,’’ the thin-walled sac of fluid in which a
developing fetus is suspended during pregnancy.
During the sampling procedure, the obstetrician inserts
a very fine needle through the woman’s abdomen into
the uterus and amniotic sac and withdraws approximately one ounce of amniotic fluid for testing. The
relatively painless procedure is performed on an outpatient basis, sometimes using local anesthesia.
The physician uses ultrasound images to guide
needle placement and collect the sample, thereby
minimizing the risk of fetal injury and the need for
repeated needle insertions. Once the sample is collected, the woman can return home after a brief
observation period. She may be instructed to rest
for the first 24 hours and to avoid heavy lifting for
two days.
The sample of amniotic fluid is sent to a laboratory where fetal cells contained in the fluid are isolated
and grown in order to provide enough genetic material
for testing. This takes about seven to 14 days. The
material is then extracted and treated so that visual
examination for defects can be made. For some disorders, like Tay-Sachs, the simple presence of a telltale
chemical compound in the amniotic fluid is enough to
confirm a diagnosis. Depending on the specific tests
ordered, and the skill of the lab conducting them, all
the results are available between one and four weeks
after the sample is taken.
Cost of the procedure depends on the doctor, the
lab, and the tests ordered. Most insurers provide coverage for women over 35, as a follow-up to positive
maternal blood screening results, and when genetic
disorders run in the family.
An alternative to amnio, now in general use, is
chorionic villus sampling, or CVS, which can be performed as early as the eighth week of pregnancy.
While this allows for the possibility of a first trimester
abortion, if warranted, CVS is apparently also riskier
and is more expensive. The most promising area of
new research in prenatal testing involves expanding
the scope and accuracy of maternal blood screening
as this poses no risk to the fetus.
Preparation
It is important for a woman to fully understand
the procedure and to feel confident in the obstetrician
performing it. Evidence suggests that a physician’s
experience with the procedure reduces the chance of
mishap. Almost all obstetricians are experienced in
performing amniocentesis. The patient should feel
free to ask questions and seek emotional support
before, during and after the amnio is performed.
Aftercare
Necessary aftercare falls into two categories,
physical and emotional.
Physical aftercare
During and immediately following the sampling
procedure, a woman may experience dizziness, nausea,
a rapid heartbeat, and cramping. Once past these
immediate hurdles, the physician will send the
woman home with instructions to rest and to report
any complications requiring immediate treatment,
including:

vaginal bleeding. The appearance of blood could
signal a problem.

premature labor. Unusual abdominal pain and/or
cramping may indicate the onset of premature labor.
Mild cramping for the first day or two following the
procedure is normal.

signs of infection. Leaking of amniotic fluid or unusual vaginal discharge, and fever could signal the
onset of infection.
Emotional aftercare
Once the procedure has been safely completed, the
anxiety of waiting for the test results can prove to be
the worst part of the process. A woman should seek
and receive emotional support from family and
friends, as well as from her obstetrician and family
doctor. Professional counseling may also prove necessary, particularly if a fetal defect is discovered.
Risks
Most of the risks and short-term side effects associated with amniocentesis relate to the sampling procedure and have been discussed above. A successful
amnio sampling results in no long-term side effects.
Risks include:

maternal/fetal hemorrhaging. While spotting in
pregnancy is fairly common, bleeding following
amnio should always be investigated.

infection. Infection, although rare, can occur after
amniocentesis. An unchecked infection can lead to
severe complications.

fetal injury. A very slight risk of injury to the fetus
resulting from contact with the amnio needle does exist.

miscarriage. The rate of miscarriage occurring
during standard, second trimester amnio appears to
be approximately 0.5%. This compares to a miscarriage rate of 1% for CVS. Many fetuses with severe
genetic defects miscarry naturally during the first
trimester.

the trauma of difficult family-planning decisions.
The threat posed to parental and family mental
health from the trauma accompanying an abnormal
test result can not be underestimated.
Normal results
Negative results from an amnio analysis indicate
that everything about the fetus appears normal and
the pregnancy can continue without undue concern. A
negative result for Down syndrome means that it is
99% certain that the disease does not exist.
An overall ‘‘normal’’ result does not, however,
guarantee that the pregnancy will come to term, or
that the fetus does not suffer from some other defect.
Laboratory tests are not 100% accurate at detecting
targeted conditions, nor can every possible fetal condition be tested for.
Abnormal results
Positive results on an amnio analysis indicate the
presence of the fetal defect being tested for, with an
accuracy approaching 100%. Prospective parents are
then faced with emotionally and ethically difficult
choices regarding treatment options, the prospect of
dealing with a severely affected newborn, and the
option of elective abortion. At this point, the parents
need expert medical advice and counseling.