Definition
Amyloidosis is a progressive, incurable, metabolic
disease characterized by abnormal deposits of protein
in one or more organs or body systems.
Description
Amyloid proteins are manufactured by malfunctioning bone marrow. Amyloidosis, which occurs
when accumulated amyloid deposits impair normal
body function, can cause organ failure or death. It
is a rare disease, occurring in about eight of every
1,000,000 people. It affects males and females equally
and usually develops after the age of 40. At least 15
types of amyloidosis have been identified. Each one
is associated with deposits of a different kind of
protein.
Types of amyloidosis
The major forms of this disease are primary systemic, secondary, and familial or hereditary amyloidosis. There is also another form of amyloidosis
associated with Alzheimer’s disease.
Primary systemic amyloidosis usually develops
between the ages of 50 and 60. With about 2,000 new
cases diagnosed annually, primary systemic amyloidosis is the most common form of this disease in the
United States. Also known as light-chain-related amyloidosis, it may also occur in association with multiple
myeloma (bone marrow cancer).
Secondary amyloidosis is a result of chronic infection or inflammatory disease. It is often associated
with:

familial Mediterranean fever (a bacterial infection
characterized by chills, weakness, headache, and
recurring fever)

granulomatous ileitis (inflammation of the small
intestine)

Hodgkin’s disease (cancer of the lymphatic system)

leprosy

osteomyelitits (bacterial infection of bone and bone
marrow)

rheumatoid arthritis
Familial or hereditary amyloidosis is the only
inherited form of the disease. It occurs in members of
most ethnic groups, and each family has a distinctive
pattern of symptoms and organinvolvement. Hereditary
amyloidosis is though to be autosomal dominant,
which means that only one copy of the defective gene
is necessary to cause the disease. A child of a parent
with familial amyloidosis has a 50-50 chance of developing the disease.
Amyloidosis can involve any organ or system in
the body. The heart, kidneys, gastrointestinal system,
and nervous system are affected most often. Other
common sites of amyloid accumulation include the
brain, joints, liver, spleen, pancreas, respiratory system,
and skin.
Causes and symptoms
The cause of amyloidosis is unknown. Most
patients have gastrointestinal abnormalities, but
other symptoms vary according to the organ(s) or
system(s) affected by the disease. Usually the affected
organs are rubbery, firm, and enlarged.
Heart
Because amyloid protein deposits can limit the
heart’s ability to fill with blood between beats, even
the slightest exertion can cause shortness of breath. If
the heart’s electrical system is affected, the heart’s
rhythm may become erratic. The heart may also be
enlarged and heart murmurs may be present.
Congestive heart failure may result.
Kidneys
The feet, ankles, and calves swell when amyloidosis
damages the kidneys. The kidneys become small and
hard, and kidney failure may result. It is not unusual for
a patient to lose 20-25 pounds and develop a distaste for
meat, eggs, and other protein-rich foods. Cholesterol
elevations that don’t respond to medication and protein
in the urine (proteinuria) are common.
Nervous system
Nervous system symptoms often appear in
patients with familial amyloidosis. Inflammation and
degeneration of the peripheral nerves (peripheral neuropathy) may be present. One of four patients with
amyloidosis has carpal tunnel syndrome, a painful
disorder that causes numbness or tingling in response
to pressure on nerves around the wrist. Amyloidosis
that affects nerves to the feet can cause burning or
numbness in the toes and soles and eventually weaken
the legs. If nerves controlling bowel function are
involved, bouts of diarrhea alternate with periods of
constipation. If the disease affects nerves that regulate
blood pressure, patients may feel dizzy or faint when
they stand up suddenly.
Liver and spleen
The most common symptoms are enlargement of
these organs. Liver function is not usually affected
until quite late in the course of the disease. Protein
accumulation in the spleen can increase the risk of
rupture of this organ due to trauma.
Gastrointestinal system
The tongue may be inflammed, enlarged, and stiff.
Intestinal movement (motility) may be reduced.
Absorption of food and other nutrients may be
impaired (and may lead to malnutrition), and there
may also be bleeding, abdominal pain, constipation,
and diarrhea.
Skin
Skin symptoms occur in about half of all cases
of primary and secondary amyloidosis and in all
cases where there is inflammation or degeneration of
the peripheral nerves. Waxy-looking raised bumps
(papules) may appear on the face and neck, in the
groin, armpits, or anal area, and on the tongue or in
the ear canals. Swelling, hemorrhage beneath the skin
(purpura), hair loss, and dry mouth may also occur.
Respiratory system
Airways may be obstructed by amyloid deposits in
the nasal sinus, larynx and traches (windpipe).
Diagnosis
Blood and urine tests can reveal the presence of
amyloid protein, but tissue or bone-marrow biopsy
is necessary to positively diagnose amyloidosis. Once
the diagnosis has been confirmed, additional laboratory tests and imaging procedures are performed to
determine:

which type of amyloid protein is involved

which organ(s) or system(s) have been affected

how far the disease has progressed
Treatment
The goal of treatment is to slow down or stop
production of amyloid protein, eliminate existing
amyloid deposits, alleviate underlying disorders
(that give rise to secondary amyloidosis), and relieve
symptoms caused by heart or kidney damage.
Specialists in cardiology, hematology (the study of
blood and the tissues that form it), nephrology (the
study of kidney function and abnormalities), neurology (the study of the nervous system), and rheumatology (the study of disorders characterized by
inflammation or degeneration of connective tissue)
work together to assess a patient’s medical status and
evaluate the effects of amyloidosis on every part of
the body.
Colchicine (Colebenemid, Probeneaid), prednisone, (Prodium), and other anti-inflammatory drugs
can slow or stop disease progression. Bone-marrow
and stem-cell transplants can enable patients to tolerate higher and more effective doses of melphalan
(Alkeran) and other chemotherapy drugs prescribed
to combat this non-malignant disease. Surgery can
relieve nerve pressure and may be performed to correct
other symptom-producing conditions. Localized amyloid deposits can also be removed surgically. Dialysis
or kidney transplantation can lengthen and improve
the quality of life for patients whose amyloidosis
results in kidney failure. Heart transplants are rarely
performed.
Supportive measures
Although no link has been established between
diet and development of amyloid proteins, a patient
whose heart or kidneys have been affected by the
disease may be advised to use a diuretic or follow a
low-salt diet.
Prognosis
Most cases of amyloidosis are diagnosed after
the disease has reached an advanced stage. The course
of each patient’s illness is unique but death, usually
a result of heart disease or kidney failure, generally
occurs within a few years. Amyloidosis associated
by multiple myeloma usually has a poor prognosis.
Most patients with both diseases die within one to
two years.
Prevention
Genetic couseling may be helpful for patients with
hereditary amyloidosis and their families. Use of
Cholchicine in patients with familial Mediterranean
fever has successfully prevented amyloidosis.