Definition
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a disease
that breaks down tissues in the nervous system
(a neurodegenerative disease) of unknown cause that
affects the nerves responsible for movement. It is also
known as motor neuron disease and Lou Gehrig’s
disease, after the baseball player whose career it ended.
Description
ALS is a disease of the motor neurons, those nerve
cells reaching from the brain to the spinal cord (upper
motor neurons) and the spinal cord to the peripheral
nerves (lower motor neurons) that control muscle
movement. In ALS, for unknown reasons, these
neurons die, leading to a progressive loss of the ability
to move virtually any of the muscles in the body. ALS
affects ‘‘voluntary’’ muscles, those controlled by conscious thought, such as the arm, leg, and trunk muscles. ALS, in and of itself, does not affect sensation,
thought processes, the heart muscle, or the ‘‘smooth’’
muscle of the digestive system, bladder, and other
internal organs. Most people with ALS retain function
of their eye muscles as well. However, various forms
of ALS may be associated with a loss of intellectual
function (dementia) or sensory symptoms.
ALS progresses rapidly in most cases. It is fatal
within three years for 50% of all people affected, and
within five years for 80%. Ten percent of people with
ALS live beyond eight years.
Causes and symptoms
Causes
The symptoms of ALS are caused by the death of
motor neurons in the spinal cord and brain. Normally
these neurons convey electrical messages from the
brain to the muscles to stimulate movement in the
arms, legs, trunk, neck, and head. As motor neurons
die, the muscles they enervate cannot be moved as
effectively, and weakness results. In addition, lack of
stimulation leads to muscle wasting, or loss of bulk.
Involvement of the upper motor neurons causes
spasms and increased tone in the limbs, and abnormal
reflexes. Involvement of the lower motor neurons
causes muscle wasting and twitching (fasciculations).
Although many causes of motor neuron degeneration have been suggested for ALS, none has yet been
proven responsible. Results of recent research have
implicated toxic molecular fragments known as free
radicals. Some evidence suggests that a cascade of
events leads to excess free radical production inside
motor neurons, leading to their death. Why free radicals should be produced in excess amounts is unclear,
as is whether this excess is the cause or the effect of
other degenerative processes. Additional agents
within this toxic cascade may include excessive levels
of a neurotransmitter known as glutamate, which may
over-stimulate motor neurons, thereby increasing
free-radical production, and a faulty detoxification
enzyme known as SOD-1, for superoxide dismutase
type 1. The actual pathway of destruction is not
known, however, nor is the trigger for the rapid degeneration that marks ALS. Further research may show
that other pathways are involved, perhaps ones even
more important than this one. Autoimmune factors or
premature aging may play some role, as could viral
agents or environmental toxins.
Two major forms of ALS are known: familial and
sporadic. Familial ALS accounts for about 10% of all
ALS cases. As the name suggests, familial ALS is
believed to be caused by the inheritance of one or
more faulty genes. About 15% of families with this
type of ALS have mutations in the gene for SOD-1.
SOD-1 gene defects are dominant, meaning only one
gene copy is needed to develop the disease. Therefore,
a parent with the faulty gene has a 50% chance of
passing the gene along to a child.
Sporadic ALS has no known cause. While many
environmental toxins have been suggested as causes,
to date no research has confirmed any of the candidates investigated, including aluminum and mercury
and lead from dental fillings. As research progresses, it
is likely that many cases of sporadic ALS will be
shown to have a genetic basis as well.
A third type, called Western Pacific ALS, occurs
in Guam and other Pacific islands. This form combines symptoms of both ALS and Parkinson’s disease.
Symptoms
The earliest sign of ALS is most often weakness in
the arms or legs, usually more pronounced on one side
than the other at first. Loss of function is usually more
rapid in the legs among people with familial ALS and
in the arms among those with sporadic ALS. Leg
weakness may first become apparent by an increased
frequency of stumbling on uneven pavement, or an
unexplained difficulty climbing stairs. Arm weakness
may lead to difficulty grasping and holding a cup, for
instance, or loss of dexterity in the fingers.
Less often, the earliest sign of ALS is weakness in
the bulbar muscles, those muscles in the mouth and
throat that control chewing, swallowing, and speaking. A person with bulbar weakness may become
hoarse or tired after speaking at length, or speech
may become slurred.
In addition to weakness, the other cardinal signs
of ALS are muscle wasting and persistent twitching
(fasciculation). These are usually seen after weakness
becomes obvious. Fasciculation is quite common in
people without the disease, and is virtually never the
first sign of ALS.
While initial weakness may be limited to one
region, ALS almost always progresses rapidly to
involve virtually all the voluntary muscle groups in
the body. Later symptoms include loss of the ability
to walk, to use the arms and hands, to speak clearly or
at all, to swallow, and to hold the head up. Weakness
of the respiratory muscles makes breathing and
coughing difficult, and poor swallowing control
increases the likelihood of inhaling food or saliva
(aspiration). Aspiration increases the likelihood of
lung infection, which is often the cause of death.
With a ventilator and scrupulous bronchial hygiene,
a person with ALS may live much longer than the
average, although weakness and wasting will continue to erode any remaining functional abilities.
Most people with ALS continue to retain function
of the extraocular muscles that move their eyes,
allowing some communication to take place with
simple blinks or through use of a computer-assisted
device.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of ALS begins with a complete
medical history and physical exam, plus a neurological
examination to determine the distribution and extent
of weakness. An electrical test of muscle function,
called an electromyogram, or EMG, is an important
part of the diagnostic process. Various other tests,
including blood and urine tests, x rays, and CT
scans, may be done to rule out other possible causes
of the symptoms, such as tumors of the skull base or
high cervical spinal cord, thyroid disease, spinal
arthritis, lead poisoning, or severe vitamin deficiency.
ALS is rarely misdiagnosed following a careful review
of all these factors.Treatment
There is no cure for ALS, and no treatment that
can significantly alter its course. There are many
things which can be done, however, to help maintain
quality of life and to retain functional ability even in
the face of progressive weakness.
As of the early 2000s, only one drug had been
approved for treatment of ALS. Riluzole (Rilutek)
appears to provide on average a three-month increase
in life expectancy when taken regularly early in the
disease, and shows a significant slowing of the loss of
muscle strength. Riluzole acts by decreasing glutamate release from nerve terminals. Experimental
trials of nerve growth factor have not demonstrated
any benefit. No other drug or vitamin currently available has been shown to have any effect on the course
of ALS.
A physical therapist works with an affected
person and family to implement exercise and stretching programs to maintain strength and range of
motion, and to promote general health. Swimming
may be a good choice for people with ALS, as it
provides a low-impact workout to most muscle
groups. One result of chronic inactivity is contracture, or muscle shortening. Contractures limit a person’s range of motion, and are often painful. Regular
stretching can prevent contracture. Several drugs are
available to reduce cramping, a common complaint
in ALS.
An occupational therapist can help design solutions to movement and coordination problems, and
provide advice on adaptive devices and home
modifications.
Speech and swallowing difficulties can be minimized or delayed through training provided by a
speech-language pathologist. This specialist can also
provide advice on communication aids, including
computer-assisted devices and simpler word boards.
Nutritional advice can be provided by a nutritionist. A person with ALS often needs softer foods to
prevent jaw exhaustion or choking. Later in the
disease, nutrition may be provided by a gastrostomy
tube inserted into the stomach.
Mechanical ventilation may be used when breathing becomes too difficult. Modern mechanical ventilators are small and portable, allowing a person with
ALS to maintain the maximum level of function and
mobility. Ventilation may be administered through a
mouth or nose piece, or through a tracheostomy tube.
This tube is inserted through a small hole made in the
windpipe. In addition to providing direct access to the
airway, the tube also decreases the risk aspiration.
While many people with rapidly progressing ALS
choose not to use ventilators for lengthy periods,
they are increasingly being used to prolong life for a
short time.
The progressive nature of ALS means that most
persons will eventually require full-time nursing care.
This care is often provided by a spouse or other family
member. While the skills involved are not difficult
to learn, the physical and emotional burden of care
can be overwhelming. Caregivers need to recognize
and provide for their own needs as well as those of
people with ALS, to prevent depression, burnout, and
bitterness.
Throughout the disease, a support group can provide important psychological aid to affected persons
and their caregivers as they come to terms with the
losses ALS inflicts. Support groups are sponsored by
both the ALS Society and the Muscular Dystrophy
Association.
Alternative treatment
Given the grave prognosis and absence of traditional medical treatments, it is not surprising that a
large number of alternative treatments have been
tried for ALS. Two studies published in 1988 suggested that amino-acid therapies may provide some
improvement for some people with ALS. While individual reports claim benefits for megavitamin therapy, herbal medicine, and removal of dental fillings,
for instance, no evidence suggests that these offer
any more than a brief psychological boost, often
followed by a more severe letdown when it becomes
apparent the disease has continued unabated.
However, once the causes of ALS are better understood, alternative therapies may be more intensively
studied. For example, if damage by free radicals
turns out to be the root of most of the symptoms,
antioxidant vitamins and supplements may be used
more routinely to slow the progression of ALS. Or, if
environmental toxins are implicated, alternative
therapies with the goal of detoxifying the body may
be of some use.
Prognosis
ALS usually progresses rapidly, and leads to
death from respiratory infection within three to five
years in most cases. The slowest disease progression is
seen in those who are young and have their first symptoms in the limbs. About 10% of people with ALS live
longer than eight years.
Prevention
There is no known way to prevent ALS or to alter
its course.