Definition
Anabolic steroids are drugs containing hormones,
or hormone-like substances, that are used to increase
strength and promote muscle growth.
Description
Steroids are a synthetic version of the human
hormone called testosterone. Testosterone stimulates
and maintains the male sexual organs. It also stimulates development of bones and muscle, promotes
skin and hair growth, and can influence emotions
and energy levels. In males, testosterone is produced
by the testicles and the adrenal gland. Women have
only the amount of testosterone produced by the
adrenal gland—much less than men have. This is
why testosterone is often called a ‘‘male’’ hormone.
There are more than 100 different types of anabolic
steroids that have been developed, and each requires
a prescription to be used legally in the United States.
The average adult male naturally produces 2.5 to 11
milligrams of testosterone daily. The average steroid
abuser often takes more than 100 mg a day, through
‘‘stacking’’ or combining several different brands of
steroids.
Medical uses
Anabolic steroids were first developed in the
1930s in Europe, in part to increase the physical
strength of German soldiers. Anabolic steroids were
tried by physicians for many other purposes in the
1940s and 1950s with varying success. Disadvantages
outweighed benefits for most purposes, and during the
later decades of the twentieth century medical use in
North America and Europe was restricted to a few
conditions. These include:

Bone marrow stimulation: During the second half of
the twentieth century anabolic steroids were the
mainstay of therapy for hypoplastic anemia not due
to nutrient deficiency, especially aplastic anemia.
Anabolic steroids were slowly replaced by synthetic
protein hormones that selectively stimulate growth
of blood cell precursors.

Growth stimulation: Anabolic steroids were used
heavily by pediatric endocrinologists for children
with growth failure from the 1960s through the
1980s. Availability of synthetic growth hormone
and increasing social stigmatization of anabolic steroids led to reduction of this use.
Stimulation of appetite and preservation of muscle
mass: Anabolic steroids have been given to people
with chronic wasting conditions such as cancer and
HIV/AIDS.

Induction of male puberty: Androgens are given to
many boys distressed about extreme delay of puberty. Testosterone is as of 2005 nearly the only androgen used for this purpose, but synthetic anabolic
steroids were often used prior to the 1980s.

To treat certain kinds of breast cancer in some women.

To treat angioedema, which causes swelling of the face,
arms, legs, throat, windpipe, bowels, or sexual organs.
Abuse of steroids
The controversy surrounding steroid abuse began
in the 1950s during the Olympic Games when the
athletic community discovered that athletes from
Russia and some East European nations, which had
dominated the games, had taken large doses of steroids. Many of the male athletes developed such large
prostate glands (a gland located near the bladder and
urethra that aids in semen production) that they
needed a tube inserted in order to urinate. Some of
the female athletes developed so many male characteristics chromosome tests were necessary to prove that
they were still women. Competitive weightlifters also
began using steroids in the 1950s as a way to increase
their athletic performance. Use gradually spread
throughout the world among athletes in other sports.
Concerns over the growing illicit market and the
prevalence of abuse, combined with the possibility of
harmful long-term effects of steroids use, led the U.S.
Congress in 1991 to place anabolic steroids in
Schedule III of the Controlled Substances Act
(CSA). The CSA defines anabolic steroids as any
drug or hormonal substance chemically and pharmacologically related to testosterone (other than estrogens, progestins, and corticosteroids) that promotes
muscle growth. Most illicit anabolic steroids are sold
at gyms, bodybuilding competitions, and through the
mail and Internet. For the most part, these substances
are smuggled into the United States. Anabolic steroids
commonly encountered on the illicit market include:
boldenone (Equipoise), ethlestrenol (Maxibolin),
fluoxymesterone (Halotestin), methandriol, methandrostenolone (Dianabol), methyltestosterone, nandrolone (Durabolin, DecaDurabolin), oxandrolone
(Anavar), oxymetholone (Anadrol), stanozolol
(Winstrol), testosterone (including sustanon), and
trenbolone (Finajet). In addition, a number of counterfeit products are sold as anabolic steroids.
In 2004, federal health officials initiated a crackdown on companies that manufacture, market, or
distribute products containing androstenedione, or
‘‘andro,’’ due to concerns about the safety of the substance. Widely marketed to athletes and body
builders, androstenedione has been advertised to promote muscle growth, improve muscular strength,
reduce fat, and slow aging. Androstenedione acts like
a steroid once it is metabolized by the body and can
pose similar kinds of health risks. People produce
androstenedione naturally during the making of testosterone and estrogen. When people consume
androstenedione, it is converted into testosterone
and estrogen. Scientific evidence shows that when
androstenedione is taken over time and in sufficient
quantities, it may increase the risk of serious and lifethreatening diseases, including liver failure.
On January 20, 2005, the Anabolic Steroid Control
Act of 2004 took effect, amending the Controlled
Substance Act by placing both anabolic steroids and
prohormones on a list of controlled substances, making
possession of the banned substances a federal crime.
Also in 2005, Major League Baseball (MLB), amid
long-time rumors of anabolic steroid abuse among
players, was rocked by the publication of Juiced by
former Oakland Athletics outfielder Jose Canseco
who alleged steroid abuse was wide-spread in professional baseball. In response, Congress held hearings in
March 2005 on steroid abuse in the MLB, subpoenaing
such baseball superstars as home run champion Mark
McGwire (now retired), Sammy Sosa, and Curt
Schilling to testify. In response,MLB officials promised
a crackdown on anabolic steroid use among players.
It has been estimated that at least one in 15 male
high school seniors in the United States—more than
500,000 boys—has used steroids. Some are athletes
attempting to increase their strength and size; others
are simply youths attempting to speed up their growth
to keep pace with their peers. In some countries, anabolic steroids are available over the counter. In the
United States, a doctor’s prescription is necessary.
Causes and symptoms
While the effects of steroids can seem desirable at
first, there are serious side effects. Excessive use can
cause a harmful imbalance in the body’s normal hormonal balance and body chemistry. Heart attacks,
water retention leading to high blood pressure and
stroke, and liver and kidney tumors all are possible.
Young people may develop acne, sometimes severe,
and a halting of bone growth. Males may experience
shrinking testicles, falling sperm counts, enlarged
breasts, and enlarged prostate glands. Women frequently show signs of masculinity and may be at higher
risk for certain types of cancer and the possibility of
birth defects in their children. Steroids fool the body
into thinking that testosterone is being produced. The
body, sensing an excess of testosterone, shuts down
bodily functions involving testosterone, such as bone
growth. The ends of long bones fuse together and stop
growing, resulting in stunted growth.
The psychological effects of steroid use are also
alarming: drastic mood swings, inability to sleep,
depression, and feelings of hostility. Steroids may
also be psychologically addictive. Once started,
users—particularly athletes—enjoy the physical socalled benefits of increased size, strength, and endurance so much that they are reluctant to stop even when
told about the risks.
In addition to these dangerous side effects, steroid
abuse brings other risks, some of which are connected
to the way some steroids are manufactured and distributed. The drugs are often made in motel rooms and
warehouses in Mexico, Europe, and other countries
and then smuggled into the United States. The
potency, purity, and strength of the steroids produced
this way are not regulated; therefore, users cannot
know how much they are taking. Counterfeit steroids
are also sold as the real thing. So it is often impossible
to tell exactly what some products contain.
Most data on the long-term effects of anabolic
steroids on humans come from case reports rather
than formal scientific studies. From the case reports,
the incidence of life-threatening effects appears to be
low, but serious adverse effects may be under-recognized or under-reported. Data from animal studies
seem to support this possibility. One study found
that exposing male mice for one-fifth of their lifespan
to steroid doses comparable to those taken by human
athletes caused a high percentage of premature deaths.
Most effects of anabolic steroid use are reversible if
the abuser stops taking the drugs, but some can be
permanent.
Diagnosis
Anyone who is using anabolic steroids without a
prescription and not under the direction of a physician
is considered abusing the drug and should seek medical help in stopping the use.
Treatment
Few studies of treatments for anabolic steroid
abuse have been conducted. Knowledge as of 2005 isbased largely on the experiences of a small number of
physicians who have worked with patients undergoing
steroid withdrawal. The physicians have found that
supportive therapy is sufficient in some cases. Patients
are educated about what they may experience during
withdrawal and are evaluated for suicidal thoughts. If
symptoms are severe or prolonged, medications or
hospitalization may be needed.
Some medications that have been used for treating
steroid withdrawal restore the hormonal system after
its disruption by steroid abuse. Other medications target specific withdrawal symptoms, for example, antidepressants to treat depression, and analgesics (pain
killers, such as aspirin and ibuprofen) for headaches
and muscle and joint pains. Some patients require assistance beyond simple treatment of withdrawal symptoms and are treated with behavioral therapies.
Alternative treatment
There is little data on alternative medicines or
treatments for anabolic steroid abuse. However, anabolic steroid manufacturers recommend saw palmetto
to be taken in conjunction with androstenedione as it
can help reduce associated hair loss and is useful in
controlling prostate enlargement.
Prognosis
Anabolic steroid abuse is a treatable condition
and can be stopped. Teenagers and adults can overcome the problem with the help of parents and other
family members, support groups, psychotherapy,
medication, treatment programs, and family counseling. These programs are customized to help teens and
adults lead productive and normal lives. However,
heavy steroid use—even if it is stopped after a few
years—may increase the risk of liver cancer. A steroid
user who quits may suffer a side effect commonly linked
to low testosterone—severe depression—which can
lead to suicidal thoughts and even suicide. The risk of
depression and suicide is highest among teens.
Some physicians recommend that athletes using
steroids avoid sudden discontinuance of all steroids at
the same time because their bodies may enter an
immediate catabolic (sudden release of energy)
phase. The cortisone receptors will be free and in
combination with the low testosterone and androgen
levels, a considerable loss of strength and mass, and an
increase of fat and water, and often breast enlargement in males can occur. Breast enlargement is possible because the suddenly low androgen level shifts the
relationship in favor of the estrogens which suddenly
become the domineering hormone.
Prevention
The best prevention is education to alert young
people to the dangers, both medical and legal, in the
illegal use of anabolic steroids. In its effort to alert
teenagers to the dangers of steroid abuse, the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) developed a
series of pamphlets, posters, and public service
announcements. Much of this information is available
on-line at <http://www.fda.gov>. Anabolic steroids
are in the same regulatory category as cocaine, heroin,
LSD, and other habit-forming drugs. This means that,
in addition to the FDA, the Drug Enforcement Agency
(DEA) helps to enforce laws relating to their abuse.
Athletic organizations have joined the fight. The
Olympic Games are now closely monitored to prevent
athletes who use steroids from participating. The
National Football League has a strict testing policy
in its training camps; it delivers fines and suspensions
to those who test positive and bans repeat offenders.
The National Collegiate Athletic Association, too, has
established stricter measures for testing and disciplining steroid users.