Definition
An anaerobic infection is an infection caused by
bacteria (called anaerobes) which cannot grow in the
presence of oxygen. Anaerobic bacteria can infect
deep wounds, deep tissues, and internal organs where
there is little oxygen. These infections are characterized by abscess formation, foul-smelling pus, and tissue destruction.
Description
Anaerobic means ‘‘life without air.’’ Anaerobic
bacteria grow in places which completely, or almost
completely, lack oxygen. They are normally found in
the mouth, gastrointestinal tract, and vagina, and on
the skin. Commonly known diseases caused by anaerobic bacteria include gas gangrene, tetanus, and botulism. Nearly all dental infections are caused by
anaerobic bacteria.
Anaerobic bacteria can cause an infection when a
normal barrier (such as skin, gums, or intestinal wall)
is damaged due to surgery, injury, or disease. Usually,
the immune system kills any invading bacteria, but
sometimes the bacteria are able to grow and cause an
infection. Body sites that have tissue destruction
(necrosis) or a poor blood supply are low in oxygen
and favor the growth of anaerobic bacteria. The low
oxygen condition can result from blood vessel disease,
shock, injury, and surgery.
Anaerobic bacteria can cause infection practically
anywhere in the body. For example:

Mouth, head, and neck. Infections can occur in the
root canals, gums (gingivitis), jaw, tonsils, throat,
sinuses, and ears.

Lung. Anaerobic bacteria can cause pneumonia, lung
abscesses, infecton of the lining of the lung
(empyema), and dilated lung bronchi (bronchiectasis).

Intraabdominal. Anaerobic infections within the
abdomen include abscess formation, peritonitis, and
appendicitis.

Female genital tract. Anaerobic bacteria can cause
pelvic abscesses, pelvic inflammatory disease, inflammation of the uterine lining (endometritis), and pelvic
infections following abortion, childbirth, and surgery.

Skin and soft tissue. Anaerobic bacteria are common
causes of diabetic skin ulcers, gangrene, destructive
infection of the deep skin and tissues (necrotizing
fascitis), and bite wound infections.

Central nervous system. Anaerobic bacteria can
cause brain and spinal cord abscesses.

Bloodstream. Anaerobic bacteria can be found in the
bloodstream of ill patients (a condition called
bacteremia).
Causes and symptoms
People who have experienced shock, injury, or
surgery, and those with blood vessel disease or
tumors are at an increased risk for infection by anaerobic bacteria. There are many different kinds of
anaerobic bacteria which can cause an infection.
Indeed, most anaerobic infections are ‘‘mixed infections’’ which means that there is a mixture of different bacteria growing. The anaerobic bacteria that
most frequently cause infections are Bacteroides
fragilis, Peptostreptococcus, and Clostridium species.
The signs and symptoms of anaerobic infection can
vary depending on the location of the infection. In general, anaerobic infections result in tissue destruction, an
abscess which drains foul-smelling pus, and possibly
fever. Symptoms for specific infections are as follows:

Tooth and gum infections. Swollen, tender bleeding
gums, bad breath, and pain. Severe infections may
produce oozing sores.

Throat infection. An extremely sore throat, bad
breath, a bad taste in the mouth, fever, and a sense
of choking.

Lung infection. Chest pain, coughing, difficulty breathing, fever, foul-smelling sputum, and weight loss.

Intraabdominal infection. Pain, fever, and possibly,
if following surgery, foul- smelling drainage from the
wound.

Pelvic infection. Foul-smelling pus or blood draining
from the uterus, general or localized pelvic pain,
fever, and chills.

Skin and soft tissue infection. Infected wounds are
red, painful, swollen, and may drain a foul-smelling
pus. Skin infection causes localized swelling, pain,
redness, and possibly a painful, open sore (ulcer)
which drains foul-smelling pus. Severe skin infections
may cause extensive tissue destruction (necrosis).

Bloodstream. Bloodstream invasion causes high
fever (up to 1058F [40.68C]), chills, a general ill feeling, and is potentially fatal.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of anaerobic infection is based primarily on symptoms, the patient’s medical history,
and location of the infection. A foul-smelling infection
or drainage from an abscess is diagnostic of anaerobic
infection. This foul smell is produced by anaerobic
bacteria and occurs in one third to one half of patients
late in the infection. Other clues to anaerobic infection
include tissue necrosis and gas production at the infection
site. A sample from the infected site may be obtained,
using a swab or a needle and syringe, to determine which
bacteria is (are) causing the infection. Because these bacteria can be easily killed by oxygen, they rarely grow in
the laboratory cultures of tissue or pus samples.
The recent medical history of the patient is helpful
in diagnosing anaerobic infection. A patient who has or
recently had surgery, dental work, tumors, blood vessel
disease, or injury are susceptible to this infection. The
failure to improve following treatment with antibiotics
that aren’t able to kill anaerobes is another clue that
the infection is caused by anaerobes. The location and
type of infection also help in the diagnosis.
Diagnostic tests may include blood tests to see if
bacteria are in the bloodstream and x rays to look at
internal infections.
Treatment
Serious infections may require hospitalization for
treatment. Immediate antibiotic treatment of anaerobic
infections is necessary. Laboratory testing may identify
the bacteria causing the infection and also which antibiotic will work best. Every antibiotic does not work
against all anaerobic bacteria but nearly all anaerobes
are killed by chloramphenicol (Chloromycetin), metronidazole (Flagyl or Protostat), and imipenem
(Primaxin). Other antibiotics which may be used are
clindamycin (Cleocin) or cefoxitin (Mefoxin).
Surgical removal or drainage of the abscess is
almost always required. This may involve drainage
by needle and syringe to remove the pus from a skin
abscess (called ‘‘aspiration’’). The area would be
numbed prior to the aspiration procedure. Also,
some internal abscesses can be drained using this
procedure with the help of ultrasound (a device
which uses sound waves to visualize internal organs).
This type of abscess drainage may be performed in
the doctor’s office.
Prognosis
Complete recovery should be achieved with the
appropriate surgery and antibiotic treatment.
Untreated or uncontrolled infections can cause severe
tissue and bone destruction, which would require plastic surgery to repair. Serious infections can be life
threatening.
Prevention
Although anaerobic infections can occur in anyone, good hygiene and general health may help to
prevent infections.