Definition
The anus is either not present or it is in the wrong
place.
Description
There are basically two kinds of anal atresia. In
boys with high anal atresia, there may be a channel
(fistula) connecting the large intestine to either the
urethra (which delivers urine from the bladder) or
the bladder itself. In girls, the channel may connect
with the vagina. Sixty percent of children with high
anal atresia have other defects, including problems
with the esophagus, urinary tract, and bones. In low
anal atresia, the channel may open in front of the
circular mass of muscles that constrict to close the
anal opening (anal sphincter) or, in boys, below
the scrotum. Occasionally, the intestine ends just
under the skin. It is estimated that overall abnormalities of the anus and rectum occur in about one in every
5,000 births and are slightly more common among
boys. A mother who has one child with these kind of
conditions has a 1% chance of having another child
who suffers from this ailment.
Causes and symptoms
Anal atresia is a defect in the development of the
fetus. The cause is unknown, but genetics seem to play
a minor role.
Diagnosis
Usually a physician can make an obvious visual
diagnosis of anal atesia right after birth. Occasionally,
however, anal atresia is missed until the baby is fed and
signs of intestinal obstruction appear. At the end of the
first or second day, the abdomen swells and there is
vomiting of fecal material. To determine the type of
anal atresia and the exact position, x rays will be taken
which include injecting opaque dye into the opening.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or computed tomography scans (CT), as well as ultrasound, are the imaging techniques used to determine the type and size of
the anal atresia. Ultrasound uses sound waves, CT
scans pass x rays through the body at different angles,
and an MRI uses a magnetic field and radio waves.
Treatment
Surgery is the only treatment for anal atresia. For
high anal atresia, immediately after the diagnosis is
made, a surgical incision is made in the large intestine
to make a temporary opening (colostomy) in the abdomen where waste is excreted. Several months later, the
intestine is moved into the ring of muscle (sphincter)
that is part of the anus and a hole is made in the skin.
The colostomy is closed several weeks later. In low anal
atresia, immediately after diagnosis, a hole is made in
the skin to open the area where the anus should be. If
the channel is in the wrong place, the intestine is
moved into the correct position sometime during the
child’s first year. After surgery, the pediatric surgeon
uses an instrument to dilate or widen the rectum and
teaches the parents how to do this daily at home to
prevent scar tissue from contracting.
Prognosis
With high anal atresia, many children have problems controlling bowel function. Most also become
constipated. With low anal atresia, children generally
have good bowel control, but they may still become
constipated.
Prevention
There is no known way to prevent anal atresia.