Definition
Opioid analgesics, also known as narcotic analgesics, are pain relievers that act on the central nervous
system. Like all narcotics, they may become habitforming if used over long periods.
Purpose
Opioid analgesics are used to relieve pain from a
variety of conditions. Some are used before or during
surgery (including dental surgery) both to relieve pain
and to make anesthetics work more effectively. They
may also be used for the same purposes during labor
and delivery.
Opioids are also given to relieve the pain of terminal
cancer, diabetic neuropathy, lower back pain, and other
chronic diseases or disorders. The World Health
Organization (WHO) has established a three-stage
‘‘ladder’’ for the use of opioids in managing cancer pain.
Description
Opioid analgesics relieve pain by acting directly
on the central nervous system. However, this can also
lead to unwanted side effects, such as drowsiness,
dizziness, breathing problems, and physical or mental
dependence.
Among the drugs in this category are codeine,
propoxyphene (Darvon), propoxyphene and acetaminophen (Darvocet N), meperidine (Demerol), hydromorphone (Dilaudid), morphine, oxycodone,
oxycodone and acetaminophen (Percocet, Roxicet),
and hydrocodone and acetaminophen (Lortab,
Anexsia). These drugs come in many forms—tablets,
syrups, suppositories, and injections, and are sold only
by prescription. For some, a new prescription is
required for each new supply—refills are prohibited
according to federal regulations.
Recommended dosage
Recommended doses vary, depending on the type of
opioid analgesic and the form in which it is being used.
Doses may be different for different patients. Check with
the physician who prescribed the drug or the pharmacist who filled the prescription for correct dosages, and
make sure to understand how to take the drug.
Always take opioid analgesics exactly as directed.
Never take larger or more frequent doses, and do not
take the drug for longer than directed. Do not stop
taking the drug suddenly without checking with the
physician or dentist who prescribed it. Gradually
tapering the dose may the chance of withdrawal
symptoms.
Precautions
Anyone who uses opioid analgesics—or any narcotic—over a long time may become physically or
mentally dependent on the drug. Physical dependence
may lead to withdrawal symptoms when the person
stops taking the medicine. Building tolerance to these
drugs is also possible when they are used for a long
period. Over time, the body needs larger and larger
doses to relieve pain.
Take these drugs exactly as directed. Never take
more than the recommended dose, and do not take the
drugs more often than directed. If the drugs do not
seem to be working, consult your physician. Do not
share these or any other prescription drugs with others
because the drug may have a completely different
effect on the person for whom it was not prescribed.
Children and older people are especially sensitive
to opioid analgesics and may have serious breathing
problems after taking them. Children may also
become unusually restless or agitated when given
these drugs.
Opioid analgesics increase the effects of alcohol.
Anyone taking these drugs should not drink alcoholic
beverages.
Some of these drugs may also contain aspirin,
caffeine, or acetaminophen. Refer to the entries on
each of these drugs for additional precautions.
Special conditions
People with certain medical conditions or who are
taking certain other medicines can have problems if they
take opioid analgesics.Before taking these drugs, be sure
to let the physician know about any of these conditions.ALLERGIES. Let the physician know about any allergies to foods, dyes, preservatives, or other substances
and about any previous reactions to opioid analgesics. PREGNANCY. Women who are pregnant or plan
to become pregnant while taking opioid analgesics
should let their physicians know. No evidence exists
that these drugs cause birth defects in people, but some
do cause birth defects and other problems when given to
pregnant animals in experiments. Babies can become
dependent on opioid analgesics if their mothers use
too much during pregnancy. This can cause the baby
to go through withdrawal symptoms after birth. If
taken just before delivery, some opioid analgesics
may cause serious breathing problems in the newborn.
BREAST FEEDING. Some opioid analgesics can pass
into breast milk. Women who are breast feeding
should check with their physicians about the safety
of taking these drugs.
OTHER MEDICAL CONDITIONS. These conditions
may influence the effects of opioid analgesics:

head injury. The effects of some opioid analgesics
may be stronger and may interfere with recovery in
people with head injuries.

history of convulsions. Some of these drugs may
trigger convulsions.

asthma, emphysema, or any chronic lung disease
Interactions
Anyone taking these drugs should notify his or her
physician before taking opioid analgesics:

Central nervous system (CNS) depressants, such as
antihistamines and other medicines for allergies, hay
fever, or colds; tranquilizers; some other prescription
pain relievers; seizure medicines; muscle relaxants;
sleeping pills; some anesthetics (including dental
anesthetics).

Monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors, such as phenelzine (Nardil) and tranylcypromine (Parnate). The
combination of the opioid analgesic meperidine
(Demerol) and MAO inhibitors is especially
dangerous.

Tricyclic antidepressants, such as amitriptyline
(Elavil).

Anti-seizure medicines, such as carbamazepine
(Tegretol). May lead to serious side effects, including
coma, when combined with propoxyphene and acetaminophen (Darvocet-N) or propoxyphene
(Darvon).

Muscle relaxants, such as cyclobenzaprine (Flexeril).

Sleeping pills, such as triazolam (Halcion).

Blood-thinning drugs, such as warfarin (Coumadin).

Naltrexone (Trexan, Revia). Cancels the effects of
opioid analgesics.

Rifampin (Rifadin).

Zidovudine (AZT, Retrovir). Serious side effects
when combined with morphine.
Opioids may also interact with certain herbal preparations sold as dietary supplements. Among the
herbs known to interact with opioids are valerian
(Valeriana officinalis), ginseng (Panax ginseng), kava
kava (Piper methysticum), and chamomile (Matricaria
chamomilla). As of early 2004 the National Center for
Complementary and Alternative Medicine (NCCAM)
is beginning a study of the possible interactions
between St. John’s wort Hypericum perforatum, a
herb frequently used to relieve symptoms of depression, and the opioid analgesics fentanyl and oxycodone. It is just as important for patients to inform their
doctor of herbal remedies that they take on a regular
basis as it is to give the doctor a list of their other
prescription medications.