Definition
Anal warts, also known as condyloma acuminata,
are small warts that can occur in the rectum.
Description
Initially appear as tiny blemishes that can be as
small as the head of a pin or grow into larger cauliflower-like protuberances. They can be yellow, pink,
or light brown in color, and only rarely are painful or
uncomfortable. In fact, infected individuals often are
unaware that they exist. Most cases are caused by
sexual transmission.
Most individuals have between one to 10 genital
warts thtat range in size from roughly 0.5–1.9 cm2
.
Some will complain of painless bumps or itching, but
often, these warts can remain completely unnoticed.
Causes and symptoms
Condyloma acuminatum is one of the most common sexually transmitted disease (STD) in the United
States. Young adults aged 17 to 33 years are at greatest
risk. Risk factors include smoking, using oral contraceptives, having multiple sexual partners, and an early
coital age. In addition, individuals who have a history of
immunosuppression or anal intercourse are also at risk.
Roughly 90% of all anal warts are caused by the
human papilloma virus (HPV) types 6 and 11, which
are the least likely of over 60 types of HPV to become
cancerous. Anal warts are usually transmitted through
direct sexual contact with someone who is infected with
condyloma acuminata anywhere in the genital area,
including the penis and vagina. Studies have shown
that roughly 75% of those who engage in sexual contact with someone infected with condyloma acuminata
will develop these warts within three months.
Treatment
According to guidelines from theCenters forDisease
Control (CDC), the treatment of all genital warts,including anal warts, should be conducted according to the
methods preferred by the patient, the medications or
procedures most readily available, and the experience
of the patient’s physician in removing anal warts.
Treatment options include electrical cautery, surgical removal, or both. Warts that appear inside the
anal canal will almost always be treated with cauterization or surgical removal. Surgical removal, also
known as excision, has the highest success rates and
lowest recurrence rates. Indeed, studies have shown
that initial cure rates range from 63–91%.
Unfortunately, most cases require numerous
treatments because the virus that causes the warts
can live in the surrounding tissue. The area may seem
normal and wart-free for six months or longer before
another wart develops.
Electrocoagulation, a technique that uses electrical energy to destroy the warts, is usually the most
painful of the procedures done to eliminate condyloma acuminata of the anus, and is usually reserved
for larger warts. It is done with local anesthesia, and
may cause discharge or bleeding from the anus.
Follow-up visits to the physician are necessary to
make sure that the warts have not recurred. It is
recommended that these patients see their physicians
every three to six months for up to 1.5 years, which is
how long the incubation period is for the HPV virus.
Carbon dioxide laser treatment and electrodesiccation are other options, but these are usually reserved for
extensive warts or those that continue to recur despite
numerous treatments. However, because HPV virus can be transmitted via the smoke caused by these procedures, they are usually reserved for the worst infections.
For small warts that affect only the skin around
the anus, several medications are available, which can
be applied directly to the surface of the warts by a
physician or by the patients themselves.
Such medications include podophyllum resin
(Podocon-25, Pod-Ben-25), a substance made from
the cytotoxic extracts of several plants. This agent
offers a cure rate of 20–50% when used alone, and is
applied by the physician weekly and then washed off
6 hours later by the patient.
Podofilox (Condylox) is another agent, and is
available for patients to use at home. It can be applied
twice daily for up to 4 weeks. Podofilox offers a
slightly higher cure rate than podophyllin, and can
also be used to prevent warts.
Trichloroacetic and bichloroacetic acids are available in several concentrations up to 80% for the treatment of condyloma acuminata. These acids work to
cauterize the skin, and are quite caustic. Nevertheless,
they cause less irritation and overall body effects than
the other agents mentioned above. Recurrence, however, is higher with these acids.
Bleomycin (Blenoxane) is another treatment
option, but it has several drawbacks. First, it must be
administered by a physician into each lesion via injection, but is can have a host of side effects, and patients
must be followed carefully by their physician.
Imiquimod 5% cream is also available for patients
to apply themselves. It is to be applied three times
weekly, for up to 16 weeks, and has been shown to
clear warts within eight to 10 weeks.
Finally, the interferon drugs, which are naturally
occurring proteins that have antiviral and antitumor
effects, are available. These include interferon alfa 2a
and 2b (Roferon, Intron A), which are to be injected
into each lesion twice a week for up to eight weeks.
Prognosis
Once a diagnosis of anal warts has been made,
further outbreaks can be controlled or sometimes prevented with proper care. Unfortunately, many cases of
anal warts either fail to respond to treatment or recur.
Patients have to undergo roughly six to nine treatments over several months to assure that the warts
are completely eradicated.
Recurrence rates have been estimated to be over
50% afterone year andmaybe due to thelongincubation
ofHPV (up to 1.5 years), deeplesions,undetectedlesions,
virus present in surrounding skin that is not treated.
Prevention
Sexual abstinence and monogamous relationships
can be the most effective form of prevention, and
condoms may also decrease the chances of transmission of condyloma acuminata. Abstinence from sexual
relations with people who have anal or genital warts
can prevent infection. Unfortunately, since many people may not be aware that they have this condition,
this is not always possible.
Individuals infected with anal warts should have
follow-up checkups every few weeks after their initial
treatment, after which self-exams can be done.
Sexual partners of people who have anal warts
should also be examined, as a precautionary preventive measure.
Finally, 5-flourouracil (Adrucil, Efudex, Fluoroplex) may be useful to prevent recurrence once the
warts have been removed. Treatment must, however,
be initiated within 1 month of wart removal.