Definition
Anal cancer is an uncommon form of cancer
affecting the anus. The anus is the inch-and-a-halflong end portion of the large intestine, which opens
to allow solid wastes to exit the body. Other parts of
the large intestine include the colon and the rectum.
Description
Different cancers can develop in different parts of
the anus, part of which is inside the body and part of
which is outside. Sometimes abnormal changes of the
anus are harmless in their early stages but may later
develop into cancer. Some anal warts, for example,
contain precancerous areas and can develop into cancer. Types of anal cancer include:

Squamous Cell Carcinomas. Approximately half of
anal cancers are squamous cell carcinomas, which
arise from the cells lining the anal margin and the
anal canal. The anal margin is the part of the anus
that is half inside and half outside the body, and the
anal canal is the part of the anus that is inside the
body. The earliest form of squamous cell carcinoma
is known as carcinoma in situ, or Bowen’s disease.

Cloacogenic Carcinomas. Approximately onefourth to one-third of anal tumors are cloacogenic
carcinomas. These tumors develop in the transitional
zone, or cloaca, which is a ring of tissue between the
anal canal and the rectum.

Adenocarcinomas. About 15% of anal cancers are
adenocarcinomas, which affect glands in the anal
area. One type of adenocarcinoma that can occur in
the anal area is called Paget’s disease, which can also
affect the vulva, breasts, and other areas of the body.

Skin cancers. A small percentage of anal cancers are
either basal cell carcinomas, or malignant melanomas, two types of skin cancer. Malignant melanomas, which develop from skin cells that produce the
brown pigment called melanin, are far more common
on areas of the body exposed to the sun.
Approximately 3,500 Americans will be diagnosed with anal cancer in 2001, and an estimated 500
individuals will die of the disease during this same
interval, according to the American Cancer Society.
Anal cancers are fairly rare: they make up only 1% to
2% of cancers affecting the digestive system. The disease affects women somewhat more often than men,
although the number of cases among men, particularly
homosexual men, seems to be increasing.
Causes and symptoms
The exact cause of most anal cancers is unknown,
although certain individuals appear to have a higher
risk of developing the disease. Smokers are at higher
risk, as are individuals with certain types of the human
papillomavirus (HPV), and those with long-term problems in the anal area, such as abnormal openings
known as fistulas. Since it increases the risk of HPV
infection, the practice of anal sex appears to increase
the risk of anal cancer—male homosexuals who practice anal sex are about 33 times more likely to have
anal cancers than heterosexual men. Those with weakened immune systems, such individuals with HIV, or
transplant patients taking immunosuppressant drugs,
are also at higher risk. Most individuals with anal
cancer are over the age of 50.
Symptoms of anal cancer resemble those found in
other harmless conditions. They include pain, itching
and bleeding, straining during a bowel movement,
change in bowel habits, change in the diameter of the
stool, discharge from the anus, and swollen lymph
nodes in the anal or groin area.
Diagnosis
Anal cancer is sometimes diagnosed during routine physicals, or during minor procedures such as
hemorrhoid removal. It may also be diagnosed during
a digital rectal examination (DRE), when a physician
inserts a gloved, lubricated finger into the anus to
feel for unusual growths. Individuals over the age of
50 who have no symptoms should have a digital rectal
examination (DRE) every five to 10 years, according
to American Cancer Society (ACS) guidelines for early
detection of colorectal cancer.
Other diagnostic procedures for anal cancer
include: Anoscopy. A procedure that involves use of a
special device to examine the anus. Proctoscopy. A
procedure that involves use of a lighted scope to see
the anal canal. Transrectal ultrasound. A procedure in
which sound waves are used to create an image of the
anus and nearby tissues.
A biopsy is performed on any suspicious growths;
that is, a tiny piece of the growth is examined under a
microscope for cancer cells. The physician may also
perform a procedure called a fine needle aspiration
biopsy, in which a needle is used to withdraw fluid
from lymph nodes located near the growth, to make
sure the cancer has not spread to these nodes.
Anal cancer severity is categorized by the following stages:

Stage 0 anal cancer is found only in the top layer of
anal tissue.

Stage I anal cancer has spread beyond the top layer
of anal tissue, but is less than 1 inch in diameter.

Stage II anal cancer has spread beyond the top layer
of anal tissue and is larger than 1 inch in diameter,
but has not spread to nearby organs or lymph nodes.

Stage IIIA anal cancer has spread to the lymph nodes
around the rectum or to nearby organs such as the
vagina or bladder.

Stage IIIB anal cancer has spread to lymph nodes in
the mid-abdomen or groin, or to nearby organs and
the lymph nodes around the rectum.

Stage IV anal cancer has spread to distant lymph
nodes within the abdomen or to distantorgans.
Treatment
Anal cancer is treated using three methods, used
either in concert or individually: surgery, radiation
therapy, and chemotherapy.
Two types of surgery may be performed. A local
resection, performed if the cancer has not spread,
removes the tumor and an area of tissue around
the tumor. An abdominoperineal resection is a more
complex procedure in which the anus and the lower
rectum are removed, and an opening called a colostomy is created for body wastes to exit. This procedure
is fairly uncommon today because radiation and
chemotherapy are just as effective.
Chemotherapy fights cancer using drugs, which
may be delivered via pill or needle. Some chemotherapy types kill cancer cells directly, while others act
indirectly by making cancer cells more vulnerable to
radiation. The main drugs used to treat anal cancer
are 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and mitomycin or 5-FU
and cisplatin. Side effects of chemotherapy, which
damages normal cells in addition to cancer cells, may
include nausea and vomiting, hair loss, loss of appetite,
diarrhea, mouth sores, fatigue, shortness of breath,
and a weakened immune system.
Alternative treatment
Research suggests acupuncture can help manage
chemotherapy-related nausea and vomiting and control pain associated with surgery.
Prognosis
Anal cancer is often curable.The chance of recovery
depends on the cancer stage and the patient’s general
health.
Prevention
Reducing the risks of the sexually transmitted diseases HPV and HIV also reduces the risk of anal
cancer. In addition, quitting smoking lowers the risk
of anal cancer.