Definition
Anaphylaxis is a rapidly progressing, life-threatening allergic reaction.
Description
Anaphylaxis is a type of allergic reaction, in which
the immune system responds to otherwise harmless
substances from the environment. Unlike other allergic reactions, however, anaphylaxis can kill. Reaction
may begin within minutes or even seconds of exposure,
and rapidly progress to cause airway constriction, skin
and intestinal irritation, and altered heart rhythms. In
severe cases, it can result in complete airway obstruction, shock, and death.
Causes and symptoms
Causes
Like the majority of other allergic reactions, anaphylaxis is caused by the release of histamine and
other chemicals from mast cells. Mast cells are a type
of white blood cell and they are found in large numbers in the tissues that regulate exchange with the
environment: the airways, digestive system, and skin.
On their surfaces, mast cells display antibodies
called IgE (immunoglobulin type E). These antibodies
are designed to detect environmental substances to
which the immune system is sensitive. Substances
from a genuinely threatening source, such as bacteria
or viruses, are called antigens. A substance that most
people tolerate well, but to which others have an allergic response, is called an allergen. When IgE antibodies bind with allergens, they cause the mast cell to
release histamine and other chemicals, which spill out
onto neighboring cells.
The interaction of these chemicals with receptors
on the surface of blood vessels causes the vessels to
leak fluid into surrounding tissues, causing fluid accumulation, redness, and swelling. On the smooth muscle cells of the airways and digestive system, they cause
constriction. On nerve endings, they increase sensitivity and cause itching.
In anaphylaxis, the dramatic response is due both
to extreme hypersensivity to the allergen and its usually
systemic distribution. Allergens are more likely to cause
anaphylaxis if they are introduced directly into the
circulatory system by injection. However, exposure by
ingestion, inhalation, or skin contact can also cause
anaphylaxis. In some cases, anaphylaxis may develop
over time from less severe allergies.
Anaphylaxis is most often due to allergens in foods,
drugs, and insect venom. Specific causes include:

Fish, shellfish, and mollusks

Nuts and seeds

Stings of bees, wasps, or hornets

Papain from meat tenderizers

Vaccines, including flu and measles vaccines

Penicillin

Cephalosporins

Streptomycin

Gamma globulin

Insulin

Hormones (ACTH, thyroid-stimulating hormone)

Aspirin and other NSAIDs

Latex, from exam gloves or condoms, for example.
Exposure to cold or exercise can trigger anaphylaxis in some individuals.
Symptoms
Symptoms may include:

Urticaria (hives)

Swelling and irritation of the tongue or mouth

Swelling of the sinuses

Difficulty breathing

Wheezing

Cramping, vomiting, or diarrhea

Anxiety or confusion

Strong, very rapid heartbeat (palpitations)

Loss of consciousness.
Not all symptoms may be present.
Diagnosis
Anaphylaxis is diagnosed based on the rapid
development of symptoms in response to a suspect
allergen. Identification of the culprit may be done
with RAST testing, a blood test that identifies IgE
reactions to specific allergens. Skin testing may be
done for less severe anaphylactic reactions.
Treatment
Emergency treatment of anaphylaxis involves
injection of adrenaline (epinephrine) which constricts
blood vessels and counteracts the effects of histamine. Oxygen may be given, as well as intravenous
replacement fluids. Antihistamines may be used for
skin rash, and aminophylline for bronchial constriction. If the upper airway is obstructed, placement
of a breathing tube or tracheostomy tube may be
needed.
Prognosis
The rapidity of symptom development is an indication of the likely severity of reaction: the faster
symptoms develop, the more severe the ultimate
reaction. Prompt emergency medical attention and
close monitoring reduces the likelihood of death.
Nonetheless, death is possible from severe anaphylaxis. For most people who receive rapid treatment,
recovery is complete.
Prevention
Avoidance of the allergic trigger is the only
reliable method of preventing anaphylaxis. For
insect allergies, this requires recognizing likely
nest sites. Preventing food allergies requires knowledge of the prepared foods or dishes in which the
allergen is likely to occur, and careful questioning
about ingredients when dining out. Use of a MedicAlert tag detailing drug allergies is vital to prevent
inadvertent administration during a medical
emergency.
People prone to anaphylaxis should carry an
‘‘Epi-pen’’ or ‘‘Ana-kit,’’ which contain an adrenaline
dose ready for injection.