Definition
Anemia is a condition characterized by abnormally low levels of healthy red blood cells or hemoglobin (the component of red blood cells that delivers
oxygen to tissues throughout the body).
Description
The tissues of the human body need a regular
supply of oxygen to stay healthy. Red blood cells,
which contain hemoglobin that allows them to deliver
oxygen throughout the body, live for only about 120
days. When they die, the iron they contain is returned
to the bone marrow and used to create new red blood
cells. Anemia develops when heavy bleeding causes
significant iron loss or when something happens to
slow down the production of red blood cells or to
increase the rate at which they are destroyed.
Types of anemia
Anemia can be mild, moderate, or severe enough
to lead to life-threatening complications. More than
400 different types of anemia have been identified.
Many of them are rare.
IRON DEFICIENCY ANEMIA. The onset of iron deficiency anemia is gradual and, at first, there may not be
any symptoms. The deficiency begins when the body
loses more iron than it derives from food and other
sources. Because depleted iron stores cannot meet the
red blood cell’s needs, fewer red blood cells develop. In
this early stage of anemia, the red blood cells look
normal, but they are reduced in number. Then the
body tries to compensate for the iron deficiency by
producing more red blood cells, which are characteristically small in size. Symptoms develop at this stage.
FOLIC ACID DEFICIENCY ANEMIA. Folic acid anemia is especially common in infants and teenagers.
Although this condition usually results from a dietary
deficiency, it is sometimes due to inability to absorb
enough folic acid from such foods as:

cheese

eggs

fish

green vegetables

meat

milk

mushrooms

yeast
Smoking raises the risk of developing this condition by interfering with the absorption of Vitamin C,
which the body needs to absorb folic acid. Folic acid
anemia can be a complication of pregnancy, when a
woman’s body needs eight times more folic acid than it
does otherwise.
VITAMIN B12 DEFICIENCY ANEMIA. Less common in
this country than folic acid anemia, vitamin B12 deficiency anemia is another type of megaloblastic anemia
that develops when the body doesn’t absorb enough of
this nutrient. Necessary for the creation of red blood
cells, B12 is found in meat and vegetables.
Large amounts of B12 are stored in the body, so this
condition may not become apparent until as much as
four years after B12 absorption stops or slows down. The
resulting drop in red blood cell production can cause:

loss of muscle control

loss of sensation in the legs, hands, and feet

soreness or burning of the tongue

weight loss

yellow-blue color blindness
The most common form of B12 deficiency is pernicious anemia. Since most people who eat meat or eggs
get enough B12 in their diets, a deficiency of this vitamin usually means that the body is not absorbing it
properly. This can occur among people who have had
intestinal surgery or among those who do not produce
adequate amounts of intrinsic factor, a chemical
secreted by the stomach lining that combines with
B12 to help its absorption in the small intestine.
Pernicious anemia usually strikes between the ages
of 50–60. Eating disorders or an unbalanced diet
increase the risk of developing pernicious anemia. So do:

diabetes mellitus

gastritis, stomach cancer, or stomach surgery

thyroid disease

family history of pernicious anemia
VITAMIN C DEFICIENCY ANEMIA. A rare disorder
that causes the bone marrow to manufacture abnormally small red blood cells, Vitamin C deficiency anemia
results from a severe, long-standing dietary deficiency.
HEMOLYTIC ANEMIA. Some people are born with
hemolytic anemia. Some acquire this condition, in
which infection or antibodies destroy red blood cells
more rapidly than bone marrow can replace them.
Hemolytic anemia can enlarge the spleen, accelerating the destruction of red blood cells (hemolysis).
Other complications of hemolytic anemia include:

pain

shock

gallstones and other serious health problems THALASSEMIAS. An inherited form of hemolytic
anemia, thalassemia stems from the body’s inability
to manufacture as much normal hemoglobin as it
needs. There are two categories of thalassemia,
depending on which of the amino acid chains is
affected. (Hemoglobin is composed of four chains of
amino acids.) In alpha-thalassemia, there is an imbalance in the production of the alpha chain of amino
acids; in beta-thalassemia, there is an imbalance in the
beta chain. Alpha-thalassemias most commonly affect
blacks (25% have at least one gene); beta-thalassemias
most commonly affect people of Mediterranean ancestry and Southeast Asians.
Characterized by production of red blood cells
that are unusually small and fragile, thalassemia only
affects people who inherit the gene for it from each
parent (autosomal recessive inheritance).
AUTOIMMUNE HEMOLYTIC ANEMIAS. Warm antibody hemolytic anemia is the most common type of
this disorder. This condition occurs when the body
produces autoantibodies that coat red blood cells.
The coated cells are destroyed by the spleen, liver, or
bone marrow.
Warm antibody hemolytic anemia is more common in women than in men. About one-third of
patients who have warm antibody hemolytic anemia
also have lymphoma, leukemia, lupus, or connective
tissue disease.
In cold antibody hemolytic anemia, the body
attacks red blood cells at or below normal body temperature. The acute form of this condition frequently
develops in people who have had pneumonia, mononeucleosis, or other acute infections. It tends to be
mild and short-lived, and disappears without
treatment.
Chronic cold antibody hemolytic anemia is most
common in women and most often affects those who
are over 40 and who have arthritis. This condition
usually lasts for a lifetime, generally causing few symptoms. However, exposure to cold temperatures can
accelerate red blood cell destruction, causing fatigue,
joint aches, and discoloration of the arms and hands.
SICKLE CELL ANEMIA. Sickle cell anemia is a
chronic, incurable condition that causes the body to
produce defective hemoglobin, which forces red blood
cells to assume an abnormal crescent shape. Unlike
normal oval cells, fragile sickle cells can’t hold enough
hemoglobin to nourish body tissues. The deformed
shape makes it hard for sickle cells to pass through
narrow blood vessels. When capillaries become
obstructed, a life-threatening condition called sickle
cell crisis is likely to occur.
Sickle cell anemia is hereditary. It almost always
affects blacks and people of Mediterranean descent. A
child who inherits the sickle cell gene from each parent
will have the disease. A child who inherits the sickle
cell gene from only one parent carries the sickle cell
trait, but does not have the disease.
APLASTIC ANEMIA. Sometimes curable by bone
marrow transplant, but potentially fatal, aplastic anemia is characterized by decreased production of red
and white blood cells and platelets (disc-shaped cells
that allow the blood to clot). This disorder may be
inherited or acquired as a result of:

recent severe illness

long-term exposure to industrial chemicals

use of anticancer drugs and certain other medications
ANEMIA OF CHRONIC DISEASE. Cancer, chronic
infection or inflammation, and kidney and liver disease often cause mild or moderate anemia. Chronic
liver failure generally produces the most severe symptoms. People infected with the Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) that causes AIDS often face severe
fatigue.
Causes and symptoms
Anemia is caused by bleeding, decreased red
blood cell production, or increased red blood cell
destruction. Poor diet can contribute to vitamin deficiency and iron deficiency anemias in which fewer red
blood cells are produced. Hereditary disorders and
certain diseases can cause increased blood cell destruction. However, excessive bleeding is the most common
cause of anemia, and the speed with which blood loss
occurs has a significant effect on the severity of symptoms. Chronic blood loss is usually a consequence of:

cancer

gastrointestinal tumors

diverticulosis

polyposis

heavy menstrual flow

hemorrhoids

nosebleeds

stomach ulcers

long-standing alcohol abuse
Acute blood loss is usually the result of:

childbirth

injury

a ruptured blood vessel

surgery
When a lot of blood is lost within a short time,
blood pressure and the amount of oxygen in the body
drop suddenly. Heart failure and death can follow.
Loss of even one-third of the body’s blood volume
in the space of several hours can be fatal. More gradual blood loss is less serious, because the body has
time to create new red blood cells to replace those that
have been lost.
Symptoms
Weakness, fatigue, and a run-down feeling may be
signs of mild anemia. Skin that is pasty or sallow, or
lack of color in the creases of the palm, gums, nail
beds, or lining of the eyelids are other signs of anemia.
Someone who is weak, tires easily, is often out of
breath, and feels faint or dizzy may be severely anemic.
Other symptoms of anemia are:

angina pectoris (chest pain, often accompanied by a
choking sensation that provokes severe anxiety)

cravings for ice, paint, or dirt

headache

inability to concentrate, memory loss

inflammation of the mouth (stomatitis) or tongue
(glossitis)

insomnia

irregular heartbeat

loss of appetite

nails that are dry, brittle, or ridged

rapid breathing

sores in the mouth, throat, or rectum

sweating

swelling of the hands and feet

thirst

tinnitus (ringing in the ears)

unexplained bleeding or bruising
In pernicious anemia, the tongue feels unusually
slick. A patient with pernicious anemia may have:

problems with movement or balance

tingling in the hands and feet

confusion, depression, and memory loss
Pernicious anemia can damage the spinal cord. A
doctor should be notified whenever symptoms of this
condition occur.
A doctor should also be notified if a patient who
has been taking iron supplements develops:

diarrhea

cramps

vomiting
Diagnosis
Personal and family health history may suggest
the presence of certain types of anemia. Laboratory
tests that measure the percentage of red blood cells or
the amount of hemoglobin in the blood are used to
confirm diagnosis and determine which type of anemia
is responsible for a patient’s symptoms. X rays and
examinations of bone marrow may be used to identify
the source of bleeding.
Treatment
Anemia due to nutritional deficiencies can usually
be treated at home with iron supplements or self administered injections of vitamin B12. People with folic
acid anemia should take oral folic acid replacements.
Vitamin C deficiency anemia can be cured by taking
one vitamin C tablet a day.
Surgery may be necessary to treat anemia caused
by excessive loss of blood. Transfusions of red blood
cells may be used to accelerate production of red blood
cells.
Medication or surgery may also be necessary to
control heavy menstrual flow, repair a bleeding ulcer,
or remove polyps (growths or nodules) from the
bowels.
Patients with thalassemia usually do not require
treatment. However people with a severe form may
require periodic hospitalization for blood transfusions
and/or bone marrow transplantation.
SICKLE CELL ANEMIA. Treatment for sickle cell
anemia involves regular eye examinations, immunizations for pneumonia and infectious diseases, and
prompt treatment for sickle cell crises and infections
of any kind. Psychotherapy or counseling may help
patients deal with the emotional impact of this
condition.
VITAMIN B12 DEFICIENCY ANEMIA. A life-long regimen of B12 shots is necessary to control symptoms of
pernicious anemia. The patient may be advised to limit
physical activity until treatment restores strength and
balance.
APLASTIC ANEMIA. People who have aplastic anemia are especially susceptible to infection. Treatment
for aplastic anemia may involve blood transfusions
and bone marrow transplant to replace malfunctioning cells with healthy ones.
ANEMIA OF CHRONIC DISEASE. There is no specific
treatment for anemia associated with chronic disease,
but treating the underlying illness may alleviate this
condition. Erythropoietin is a hormone that stimulates production of red blood cells. It is sometimes
used to treat anemia from kidney disease or cancer
chemotherapy. This type of anemia rarely becomes
severe. If it does, transfusions or hormone treatments
to stimulate red blood cell production may be prescribed. A working group met in 2004 to address the
specific management of anemia in patients infected
with HIV.
HEMOLYTIC ANEMIA. There is no specific treatment for cold-antibody hemolytic anemia. About
one-third of patients with warm-antibody hemolytic
anemia respond well to large doses of intravenous and
oral corticosteroids, which are gradually discontinued
as the patient’s condition improves. Patients with this
condition who don’t respond to medical therapy must
have the spleen surgically removed. This operation
controls anemia in about one-half of the patients on
whom it’s performed. Immune-system suppressants
are prescribed for patients whose surgery is not
successful.
Self-care
Anyone who has anemia caused by poor nutrition
should modify his or her diet to include more vitamins,
minerals, and iron. Vitamin C can stimulate iron
absorption. The following foods are also good sources
of iron:

almonds

broccoli

dried beans

dried fruits

enriched breads and cereals

lean red meat

liver

potatoes

poultry

rice

shellfish

tomatoes
Because light and heat destroy folic acid, fruits
and vegetables should be eaten raw or cooked as little
as possible.
Alternative treatment
As is the case in standard medical treatment, the
cause of the specific anemia will determine the alternative treatment recommended. If the cause is a deficiency, for example iron deficiency, folic acid
deficiency, B12 deficiency, or vitamin C deficiency,
supplementation is the treatment. For extensive
blood loss, the cause should be identified and corrected. Other types of anemias should be addressed
on a deep healing level with crisis intervention when
necessary.
Many alternative therapies for iron-deficiency
anemia focus on adding iron-rich foods to the
diet or on techniques to improve circulation and
digestion. Iron supplementation, especially with
iron citrate (less likely to cause constipation), is
used by alternative practitioners. This can be given
in combination with herbs that are rich in iron.
Some examples of iron-rich herbs are dandelion
(Taraxacum officinale), parsley (Petroselinum
crispum), and nettle (Urtica dioica). The homeopathic remedy ferrum phosphoricum can also be
helpful.
An iron-rich herbal tonic can also me made using
the following recipe:

soak 1/2 oz of yellow dock root and 1/2 oz dandelion
root in 1 qt of boiled water for four to 8 hours

strain and simmer until the amount of liquid is
reduced to 1 cup

remove from heat and add 1/2 cup black strap
molasses, mixing well

store in refrigerator; take 1 tsp-2 Tbsp daily
Other herbal remedies used to treat irondeficiency anemia aim to improve the digestion.
Gentian (Gentiana lutea) is widely used in Europe to
treat anemia and other nutritionally based disorders.
The bitter qualities of gentian help stimulate the digestive system, making iron and other nutrients more
available for absorption. This bitter herb can be
brewed into tea or purchased as an alcoholic extract
(tincture).
Other herbs recommended to promote digestion
include:

anise (Pimpinella anisum)

caraway (Carum carvi)

cumin (Cuminum cyminum)

linden (Tilia spp.)

licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra)
Traditional Chinese treatments for anemia
include:

acupuncture to stimulate a weakened spleen

asian ginseng (Panax ginseng) to restore energy

dong quai (Angelica sinensis) to control heavy menstrual bleeding

a mixture of dong quai and Chinese foxglove
(Rehmannia glutinosa) to clear a sallow complexion
Prognosis
Folic-acid and iron-deficiency anemias
It usually takes three to six weeks to correct folic
acid or iron deficiency anemia. Patients should continue taking supplements for another six months to
replenish iron reserves. They should have periodic
blood tests to make sure the bleeding has stopped
and the anemia has not recurred.
Pernicious anemia
Although pernicious anemia is considered incurable, regular B12 shots will alleviate symptoms and
reverse complications. Some symptoms will disappear
almost as soon as treatment begins.
Aplastic anemia
Aplastic anemia can sometimes be cured by bone
marrow transplantation. If the condition is due to
immunosuppressive drugs, symptoms may disappear
after the drugs are discontinued.
Sickle cell anemia
Although sickle cell anemia cannot be cured,
effective treatments enable patients with this disease
to enjoy longer, more productive lives.
Thalassemia
People with mild thalassemia (alpha thalassemia
trait or beta thalassemia minor) lead normal lives and
do not require treatment. Those with severe thalassemia
may require bone marrow transplantation. Genetic therapy is is being investigated and may soon be available.
Hemolytic anemia
Acquired hemolytic anemia can generally be
cured when the cause is removed.
Prevention
Inherited anemias cannot be prevented. Genetic
counseling can help parents cope with questions and
concerns about transmitting disease-causing genes to
their children.
Avoiding excessive use of alcohol, eating a balanced
diet that contains plenty of iron-rich foods, and taking
a daily multivitamin can help prevent anemia.
Methods of preventing specific types of anemia
include:

avoiding lengthy exposure to industrial chemicals
and drugs known to cause aplastic anemia

not taking medication that has triggered hemolytic
anemia and not eating foods that have caused hemolysis (breakdown of red blood cells)

receiving regular B12 shots to prevent pernicious
anemia resulting from gastritis or stomach surgery