Definition
Local or regional anesthesia involves the injection
or application of an anesthetic drug to a specific area
of the body, as opposed to the entire body and brain as
occurs during general anesthesia.
Purpose
Local anesthetics are used to prevent patients
from feeling pain during medical, surgical, or dental
procedures. Over-the-counter local anesthetics are
also available to provide temporary relief from pain,
irritation, and itching caused by various conditions,
such as cold sores, canker sores, sore throats, sunburn,
insect bites, poison ivy, and minor cuts and scratches.
Types of surgery or medical procedures that regularly make use of local or regional anesthesia include
the following:

biopsies in which skin or tissue samples are taken for
diagnostic procedures

childbirth

surgeries on the arms, hands, legs, or feet

eye surgery

surgeries involving the urinary tract or sexual organs
Surgeries involving the chest and abdomen are
usually performed under general anesthesia.
Local and regional anesthesia have advantages
over general anesthesia in that patients can avoid
some unpleasant side effects, can receive longer lasting
pain relief, have reduced blood loss, and maintain a
sense of psychological comfort by not losing
consciousness.
Description
Regional anesthesia typically affects a larger area
than local anesthesia, for example, everything below
the waist. As a result, regional anesthesia may be used
for more involved or complicated surgical or medical
procedures. Regional anesthetics are injected. Local
anesthesia involves the injection into the skin or muscle or application to the skin of an anesthetic directly
where pain will occur. Local anesthesia can be divided
into four groups: injectable, topical, dental (noninjectable), and ophthalmic.
Local and regional anesthesia work by altering the
flow of sodium molecules into nerve cells or neurons
through the cell membrane. Exactly how the anesthetic does this is not understood, since the drug
apparently does not bind to any receptor on the cell
surface and does not seem to affect the release of
chemicals that transmit nerve impulses (neurotransmitters) from the nerve cells. It is known, however,
that when the sodium molecules do not get into the
neurons, nerve impulses are not generated and pain
impulses are not transmitted to the brain. The duration of action of an anesthetic depends on the type and
amount of anesthetic administered.
Regional anesthesia
Types of regional anesthesia include:

Spinal anesthesia. Spinal anesthesia involves the
injection of a small amount of local anesthetic
directly into the cerebrospinal fluid surrounding the
spinal cord (the subarachnoid space). Blood pressure
drops are common but are easily treated.

Epidural anesthesia. Epidural anesthesia involves
the injection of a large volume of local anesthetic
directly into the space surrounding the spinal fluid
sac (the epidural space), not into the spinal fluid.
Pain relief occurs more slowly but is less likely to
produce blood pressure drops. Also, the block can be
maintained for long periods, even days.

Nerve blocks. Nerve blocks involve the injection of
an anesthetic into the area around a nerve that supplies a particular region of the body, preventing the
nerve from carrying nerve impulses to the brain.
Anesthetics may be administered with another
drug, such as epinephrine (adrenaline), which decreases
bleeding, and sodium bicarbonate to decrease the acidity of a drug so that it will work faster. In addition,
drugs may be administered to help a patient remain
calm and more comfortable or to make them sleepy.
Local anesthesia
INJECTABLE LOCAL ANESTHETICS. These medicines
are given by injection to numb and provide pain relief
to some part of the body during surgery, dental procedures, or other medical procedures. They are given
only by a trained health care professional and only in a
doctor’s office or a hospital. Some commonly used
injectable local anesthetics are procaine (Novocain),
lidocaine (Dalcaine, Dilocaine, L-Caine, Nervocaine,
	Xylocaine, and other brands), and tetracaine
(Pontocaine).
TOPICAL ANESTHETICS. Topical anesthetics, such
as benzocaine, lidocaine, dibucaine, pramoxine,
butamben, and tetracaine, relieve pain and itching by
deadening the nerve endings in the skin. They are
ingredients in a variety of nonprescription products
that are applied to the skin to relieve the discomfort of
sunburn, insect bites or stings, poison ivy, and minor
cuts, scratches, and burns. These products are sold as
creams, ointments, sprays, lotions, and gels.
DENTAL ANESTHETICS (NON-INJECTABLE). Some
local anesthetics are intended for pain relief in the
mouth or throat. They may be used to relieve throat
pain, teething pain, painful canker sores, toothaches,
or discomfort from dentures, braces, or bridgework.
Some dental anesthetics are available only with a doctor’s prescription. Others may be purchased without a
prescription, including products such as Num-Zit,
Orajel, Chloraseptic lozenges, and Xylocaine.
OPHTHALMIC ANESTHETICS. Other local anesthetics are designed for use in the eye. The ophthalmic
anesthetics proparacaine and tetracaine are used to
numb the eye before certain eye examinations. Eye
doctors may also use these medicines before measuring eye pressure or removing stitches or foreign objects
from the eye. These drugs are to be given only by a
trained health care professional.
Recommended dosage
The recommended dosage depends on the type of
local anesthetic and the purpose for which it is being
used. When using a nonprescription local anesthetic,
follow the directions on the package. Questions concerning how to use a product should be referred to a
medical doctor, dentist, or pharmacist.
Precautions
People who strongly feel that they cannot psychologically cope with being awake and alert during certain procedures may not be good candidates for local
or regional anesthesia. Other medications may be
given in conjunction with the anesthetic, however, to
relieve anxiety and help the patient relax.
Local anesthetics should be used only for the conditions for which they are intended. For example, a
topical anesthetic meant to relieve sunburn pain
should not be used on cold sores. Anyone who has
had an unusual reaction to any local anesthetic in the
past should check with a doctor before using any type
of local anesthetic again. The doctor should also be
told about any allergies to foods, dyes, preservatives,
or other substances.
Older people may be more sensitive to the effects
of local anesthetics, especially lidocaine. This
increased sensitivity may increase the risk of side
effects. Older people who use nonprescription local
anesthetics should be especially careful not to use
more than the recommended amount. Children also
may be especially sensitive to the effects of some local
anesthetics, which may increase the chance of side
effects. Anyone using these medicines on a child
should be careful not to use more than the amount
that is recommended for children. Certain types of
local anesthetics should not be used at all young children. Follow package directions carefully and check
with a doctor of pharmacist if there are any questions.
Regional anesthetics
Serious, possibly life-threatening, side effects may
occur when anesthetics are given to people who use
street drugs. Anyone who uses cocaine, marijuana,
amphetamines, barbiturates, phencyclidine (PCP, or
angel dust), heroin, or other street drugs should
make sure their doctor or dentist knows what they
have used.
Patients who have had a particular kind of reaction called malignant hyperthermia (or who have one
or more family members who have had this problem)
during or just after receiving a general anesthetic
should inform their doctors before receiving any kind
of anesthetic. Signs of malignant hyperthermia include
fast and irregular heartbeat, very high fever, breathing
problems, and muscle spasms or tightness.
Although problems are rare, some unwanted side
effects may occur when regional anesthetics are used
during labor and delivery. These anesthetics can prolong labor and increase the risk of Cesarean section.
Pregnant women should discuss with their doctors the
risks and benefits of being given these drugs.
Patients should not drive or operate other
machinery immediately following a procedure involving regional anesthesia, due to numbness and weakness, or if local anesthesia also included drugs to make
the patient sleep or strong pain medications. Injection
sites should be kept clean, dry, and uncovered to prevent infection.
Injectable local anesthetics
Until the anesthetic wears off, patients should be
careful not to injure the numbed area. If the anesthetic
was used in the mouth, do not eat or chew gum until
feeling returns.
Topical anesthetics
Unless advised by a doctor, topical anesthetics
should not be used on or near any part of the body
with large sores, broken or scraped skin, severe injury,
or infection. They should also not be used on large
areas of skin. Some topical anesthetics contain alcohol
and should not be used near an open flame, or while
smoking.
Anyone using a topical anesthetic should be careful not to get this medication in the eyes, nose, or
mouth. When using a spray form of this medication,
do not spray it directly on the face, but apply it to the
face with a cotton swab or sterile gauze pad. After
using a topical anesthetic on a child, make sure the
child does not get the medicine in his or her mouth.
Topical anesthetics are intended for the temporary relief of pain and itching. They should not be used
for more than a few days at a time. Check with a
doctor if:

the discomfort continues for more than seven days

the problem gets worse

the treated area becomes infected

new signs of irritation, such as skin rash, burning,
stinging, or swelling appear
Dental anesthetics (non-injectable)
Dental anesthetics should not be used if certain
kinds of infections are present. Check package directions or check with a dentist or medical doctor if
uncertain. Dental anesthetics should be used only for
temporary pain relief. If problems such as toothache,
mouth sores, or pain from dentures or braces continue, check with a dentist. Check with a doctor if
sore throat pain is severe, lasts more than two days,
or is accompanied by other symptoms such as fever,
headache, skin rash, swelling, nausea, or vomiting.
Patients should not eat or chew gum while the
mouth is numb from a dental anesthetic. There is a
risk of accidently biting the tongue or the inside of the
mouth. Also nothing should be eaten or drunk for one
hour after applying a dental anesthetic to the back of
the mouth or throat, since the medicine may interfere
with swallowing and may cause choking. If normal
feeling does not return to the mouth within a few
hours after receiving a dental anesthetic or if it is
difficult to open the mouth, check with a dentist.
Ophthalmic anesthetics
When anesthetics are used in the eye, it is important not to rub or wipe the eye until the effect of the
anesthetic has worn off and feeling has returned.
Rubbing the eye while it is numb could cause injury.
Side effects
Side effects of regional or local anesthetics vary
depending on the type of anesthetic used and the way it
is administered. Anyone who has unusual symptoms
following the use of an anesthetic should get in touch
with his or her doctor immediately.
There is a small risk of developing a severe headache called a spinal headache following a spinal or
epidural block. This headache is severe when the
patient is upright and hardly felt when the patient
lies down. Though rare, it can occur and can be
treated by performing a blood patch, in which a
small amount of the patient’s own blood is injected
into the area in the back where the anesthetic was
injected. The blood clots and closes up any area that
may have been leaking spinal fluid. Relief is almost
immediate. Finally, blood clots or abscess can form in
the back, but these are also readily treatable and so
pose little risk.
A physician should be notified immediately if any
of these symptoms occur:

large swellings that look like hives on the skin, in the
mouth, or in the throat

severe headache

blurred or double vision

dizziness or lightheadedness

drowsiness

confusion

anxiety, excitement, nervousness, or restlessness

convulsions (seizures)

feeling hot, cold, or numb

ringing or buzzing in the ears

shivering or trembling

sweating

pale skin

slow or irregular heartbeat

breathing problems

nusual weakness or tiredness
Interactions
Some anesthetic drugs may interact with other
medicines. When this happens, the effects of one or
both of the drugs may change or the risk of side effects
may be greater. Anyone who receives a regional or
local anesthetic should let the doctor know all other
drugs he or she is taking including prescription drugs,
nonprescription drugs, and street drugs (such as
cocaine, marijuana, and heroin).