Definition
Aneurysmectomy is a surgical procedure performed to repair a weak area in the aorta. The aorta
is the largest artery in the body and the main blood
vessel leading away from the heart.
Purpose
The purpose of aneurysmectomy is to repair an
aortic aneurysm that is likely to rupture if left in place.
Aneurysmectomy is indicated for an aortic aneurysm
that grows to at least 2 in(5 cm) or for an aortic
aneurysm of any size that is symptomatic, tender, or
enlarging rapidly.
Precautions
Aneurysmectomy may not be appropriate for
patients with severely debilitating diseases such as
cancer, emphysema, and heart failure.
Description
An aortic aneurysm is a bulge in the wall of the
aorta that is usually due to arteriosclerosis or atherosclerosis. People who are 50-80 years old are most
likely to develop an aortic aneurysm, with men four
times more likely to develop one than women.
An aortic aneurysm develops and grows slowly. It
rarely produces symptoms and is usually only diagnosed by accident during a routine physical exam or
on an x ray or ultrasound done for another reason. As
the aneurysm grows larger, the risk of bursting with no
warning, which causes catastrophic bleeding, rises. A
ruptured aortic aneurysm can cause sudden loss of a
fatal amount of blood within minutes or it can leak in
a series of small bleeds that lead within hours or days
to massive bleeding. A leaking aortic aneurysm that is
not treated is always fatal.
Aneurysmectomy is performed to repair the two
most common types of aortic aneurysms: abdominal
aortic aneurysms that occur in the abdomen below
the kidneys, and thoracic aortic aneurysms that occur
in the chest. It is major surgery performed in a hospital
under general anesthesia and involves removing debris
and then implanting a flexible tube (graft) to replace the
enlarged artery. Aneurysmectomy for an aneurysm of
the ascending aorta (the first part of the aorta that travels
upward from the heart) requires the use of a heart-lung
machine that temporarily stops the heart while the
aneurysm is repaired. Aneurysmectomy requires a
one-week hospital stay; the recovery period is five weeks.
During surgery, the site of the aneurysm (either
the abdomen or the chest) is opened with an incision to
expose the aneurysm. The aorta is clamped above and
below the aneurysm to stop the flow of blood. Then,
an incision is made in the aneurysm. An artificial
Dacron tube is sewn in place above and below the
opened aneurysm, but the aneurysm is not removed.
Plaque or clotted blood are cleaned from the diseased
tissue. The clamps are removed and blood flow is reestablished through the graft. The wall of the aneurysm is wrapped around the graft to protect it and the
skin of the abdomen or chest is sewn up.
Aneurysmectomy can be performed as elective or
emergency surgery. Elective aneurysmectomy takes
about an hour and is far safer than emergency aneurysmectomy, with a mortality rate of 3-5% for elective
abdominal aneurysmectomy and 5-10% for elective
thoracic aneurysmectomy. When an aneurysm
ruptures, 62% of patients die before they reach the
hospital. Of those who make it into emergency aneurysmectromy, 50% die. After a successful aneurysmectomy, the patient has nearly the same life expectancy as
other people of the same age.
Preparation
Before elective aneurysmectomy, blood studies, a
chest x ray, cardiac catherization, electrocardiogram
(ECG), and ultrasound are performed.
Aftercare
After aneurysmectomy, the patient is monitored
in an Intensive Care Unit for the first 24–48 hours.
Follow-up tests include ECG, chest x ray, and
ultrasound.
Risks
Elective aneurysmectomy has a 5-10% rate of
complications, such as bleeding, kidney failure,
respiratory complications, heart attack, stroke, infection, limb loss, bowel ischemia, and impotence. These
complications are many times more common in emergency aneurysmectomy.