Definition
Angioplasty is a term describing a procedure used
to widen vessels narrowed by stenoses or occlusions.
There are various types of these procedures and their
names are associated with the type of vessel entry and
equipment used. For example, percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) describes entry through
the skin (percutaneous) and navigates to the area of
the vessel of interest through the same vessel or one
that communicates with it (transluminal). In the case
of a procedure involving the coronary arteries, the
point of entry could be the femoral artery in the
groin and the catheter/guidewire system is passed
through the aorta to the heart and the origin of the
coronary arteries at the base of the aorta just outside
the aortic valve.Purpose
In individuals with an occulsive vascular disease
such as atherosclerosis, blood flow is impaired to an
organ (such as the heart) or to a distal body part ( such
as the lower leg) by the narrowing of the vessel’s lumen
due to fatty deposits or calcium accumulation. This
narrowing may occur in any vessel but may occur
anywhere. Once the vessel has been widened, adequate
blood flow is returned. The vessel may narrow again
over time at the same location and the procedure could
be repeated.
Precautions
Angioplasty procedures are performed on hospital inpatients in facilities for proper monitoring
and recovery. If the procedure is to be performed
in a coronary artery, the patient’s care is likely to
be provided by specially trained physicians, nurses,
and vascular specialists. Typically, patients are
given anticoagulants prior to the procedure to
assist in the prevention of thromboses (blood clots).
Administration of anticoagulants, however, may
impede the sealing of the vascular entry point. The
procedure will be performed using fluoroscopic guidance and contrast media. Since the decision to perform angioplasty may have been made following a
diagnostic angiogram, the patient’s sensitivity to iodinated contrast media is likely to known. The procedure may then require the use of non-ionic contrast
agents.
Description
Angioplasty was originally performed by dilating
the vessel with the introduction of larger and larger
stiff catheters through the narrowed space.
Complications of this procedure caused researchers
to develop means of widening the vessel using a minimally sized device. Today, catheters contain balloons
that are inflated to widen the vessel and stents to
provide structural support for the vessel. Lasers may
be used to assist in the break up of the fat or calcium
plaque. Catheters may also be equipped with spinning
wires or drill tips to clean out the plaque.
Angioplasty may be performed while the patient is
sedated or anesthetized, depending on the vessels
involved. If a percutaneous transluminal coronary
angioplasty (PTCA) is to be performed, the patient
will be kept awake to report on discomfort and cough
if required. PTCA procedures are performed in cardiac catheterization labs with sophisticated monitoring
devices. If angioplasty is performed in the radiology
department’s angiographic suite, the patient may be
sedated for the procedure and a nurse will monitor
the patient’s vital signs during the procedure. If performed by a vascular surgeon, the angioplasty procedure will be performed in an operating room or
specially designed vascular procedure suite.
The site of the introduction of the angioplasty
equipment is prepared as a sterile surgical site.
Although many procedures are performed by puncturing the vessel through skin, many procedures are also
performed by surgically exposing the site of entry.
Direct view of the vessel’s puncture site aids in monitoring damage to the vessel or excessive bleeding at
the site. Once the vessel is punctured and the guidewire
is introduced, fluoroscopy is used to monitor small
injections of contrast media used to visualize the path
through the vessel. If the fluoroscopy system has a
feature called ‘roadmap’, the amount of contrast
media injected will be greater in order to define the full
route the guidewire will take. The fluoroscopy system
will then superimpose subsequent images over the roadmap while the vessel is traversed, that is, the physician
moves the guidewire along the map to the destination.
Having reached the area of stenosis, the physician
will inflate the balloon on the catheter that has been
passed along the guidewire. Balloons are inflated in size
and duration depending on the size and location of the
vessel. In some cases, the use of a stent (a mesh of wire
that resembles a Chinese finger puzzle) may also be
used. The vessel may be widened before, during, or
after the deployment of the stent. Procedures for deploying stents are dependent on the type of stent used. In
cases where the vessel is tortuous or at intersections of
vessels, the use of a graph may be necessary to provide
structural strength to the vessel. Stents, graphs, and
balloon dilation may all be used together or separately.
The procedure is verified using fluoroscopy and
contrast media to produce an angiogram or by using
intravascular ultrasound or both. All equipment is
withdrawn from the vessel and the puncture site
repaired.
Risks
During the procedure there is a danger of puncturing the vessel with the guidewire. This is a very
small risk. Patients must be monitored for hematoma
or hemorrhage at the puncture site. There is also a
small risk of heart attack, emboli, and although
unlikely death. Hospitalization will vary in length by
the patient’s overall condition, any complications, and
availability of home care.