Definition
Angiography is the x-ray study of the blood
vessels. An angiogram uses a radiopaque substance,
or dye, to make the blood vessels visible under x ray.
Arteriography is a type of angiography that involves
the study of the arteries.
Purpose
Angiography is used to detect abnormalities or
blockages in the blood vessels (called occlusions)
throughout the circulatory system and in some organs.
Theprocedureis commonly used toidentifyatherosclerosis; to diagnose heart disease; to evaluate kidney function
and detect kidney cysts or tumors; to detect an aneurysm
(an abnormal bulge of an artery that can rupture leading
to hemorrhage), tumor, blood clot, or arteriovenous malformations (abnormals tangles of arteries and veins) in
the brain; and to diagnose problems with the retina of the
eye. It is also used to give surgeons an accurate ‘‘map’’ of
the heart prior to open-heart surgery, or of the brain prior
to neurosurgery.
Precautions
Patients with kidney disease or injury may suffer
further kidney damage from the contrast mediums
used for angiography. Patients who have blood clotting problems, have a known allergy to contrast mediums, or are allergic to iodine, a component of some
contrast mediums, may also not be suitable candidates
for an angiography procedure. Because x rays carry
risks of ionizing radiation exposure to the fetus, pregnant women are also advised to avoid this procedure.
Description
Angiography is usually performed at a hospital by
a trained radiologist and assisting technician or nurse.
It takes place in an x-ray or fluoroscopy suite, and for
most types of angiograms, the patient’s vital signs will
be monitored throughout the procedure.
Angiography requires the injection of a contrast dye
that makes the blood vessels visible to x ray. The dye is
injected through a procedure known asarterial puncture.
The puncture is usually made in the groin area, armpit,
inside elbow, or neck. The site is cleaned with an antiseptic agent and injected with a local anesthetic. First, a
small incision is made in the skin to help the needle pass.
A needle containing an inner wire called a stylet is
inserted through the skin into the artery. When the radiologist has punctured the artery with the needle, the
stylet is removed and replaced with another long wire
called a guide wire. It is normal for blood to spout out of
the needle before the guide wire is inserted.
The guide wire is fed through the outer needle into
the artery and to the area that requires angiographic
study. A fluoroscopic screen that displays a view of the
patient’s vascular system is used to pilot the wire to the
correct location. Once it is in position, the needle is
removed and a catheter is slid over the length of the
guide wire until it to reaches the area of study. The
guide wire is removed and the catheter is left in place in
preparation for the injection of the contrast medium,
or dye.
Depending on the type of angiography procedure
being performed, the contrast medium is either injected
by hand with a syringe or is mechanically injected with
an automatic injector connected to the catheter. An
automatic injector is used frequently because it is able
to propel a large volume of dye very quickly to the
angiogram site. The patient is warned that the injection
will start, and instructed to remain very still. The injection causes some mild to moderate discomfort. Possible
side effects or reactions include headache, dizziness,
irregular heartbeat, nausea, warmth, burning sensation, and chest pain, but they usually last only momentarily. To view the area of study from different angles
or perspectives, the patient may be asked to change
positions several times, and subsequent dye injections
may be administered. During any injection, the patient
or the camera may move.
Throughout the dye injection procedure, x-ray
pictures and/or fluoroscopic pictures (or moving
x rays) will be taken. Because of the high pressure of
arterial blood flow, the dye will dissipate through the
patient’s system quickly, so pictures must be taken in
rapid succession. An automatic film changer is used
because the manual changing of x-ray plates can eat up
valuable time.
Once the x rays are complete, the catheter is slowly
and carefully removed from the patient. Pressure is
applied to the site with a sandbag or other weight for
10-20 minutes in order for clotting to take place and
the arterial puncture to reseal itself. A pressure bandage is then applied.
Most angiograms follow the general procedures
outlined above, but vary slightly depending on the
area of the vascular system being studied. A variety
of common angiography procedures are outlined
below:
Cerebral angiography
Cerebral angiography is used to detect aneurysms,
blood clots, and other vascular irregularities in the
brain. The catheter is inserted into the femoral or
carotid artery and the injected contrast medium travels through the blood vessels on the brain. Patients
frequently experience headache, warmth, or a burning
sensation in the head or neck during the injection
portion of the procedure. A cerebral angiogram
takes two to four hours to complete.
Coronary angiography
Coronary angiography is administered by a cardiologist with training in radiology or, occasionally,
by a radiologist. The arterial puncture is typically
given in the femoral artery, and the cardiologist uses
a guide wire and catheter to perform a contrast injection and x-ray series on the coronary arteries. The
catheter may also be placed in the left ventricle to
examine the mitral and aortic valves of the heart. If
the cardiologist requires a view of the right ventricle of
the heart or of the tricuspid or pulmonic valves, the
catheter will be inserted through a large vein and
guided into the right ventricle. The catheter also serves
the purpose of monitoring blood pressures in these
different locations inside the heart. The angiogram
procedure takes several hours, depending on the complexity of the procedure.
Pulmonary angiography
Pulmonary, or lung, angiography is performed to
evaluate blood circulation to the lungs. It is also considered the most accurate diagnostic test for detecting
a pulmonary embolism. The procedure differs from
cerebral and coronary angiograms in that the guide
wire and catheter are inserted into a vein instead of an
artery, and are guided up through the chambers of the
heart and into the pulmonary artery. Throughout the
procedure, the patient’s vital signs are monitored to
ensure that the catheter doesn’t cause arrhythmias, or
irregular heartbeats. The contrast medium is then
injected into the pulmonary artery where it circulates
through the lung capillaries. The test typically takes up
to 90 minutes.
Kidney angiography
Patients with chronic renal disease or injury can
suffer further damage to their kidneys from the contrast medium used in a kidney angiogram, yet they
often require the test to evaluate kidney function.
These patients should be well-hydrated with a intravenous saline drip before the procedure, and may benefit
from available medications (e.g., dopamine) that help
to protect the kidney from further injury due to contrast agents. During a kidney angiogram, the guide
wire and catheter are inserted into the femoral artery
in the groin area and advanced through the abdominal
aorta, the main artery in the abdomen, and into the
renal arteries. The procedure will take approximately
one hour.
Fluorescein angiography
Fluorescein angiography is used to diagnose retinal problems and circulatory disorders. It is typically
conducted as an outpatient procedure. The patient’s
pupils are dilated with eye drops and he rests his chin
and forehead against a bracing apparatus to keep it
still. Sodium fluorescein dye is then injected with a
syringe into a vein in the patient’s arm. The dye will
travel through the patient’s body and into the blood
vessels of the eye. The procedure does not require
x rays. Instead, a rapid series of close-up photographs
of the patient’s eyes are taken, one set immediately
after the dye is injected, and a second set approximately 20 minutes later once the dye has moved
through the patient’s vascular system. The entire
procedure takes up to one hour.
Celiac and mesenteric angiography
Celiac and mesenteric angiography involves x-ray
exploration of the celiac and mesenteric arteries, arterial branches of the abdominal aorta that supply blood
to the abdomen and digestive system. The test is commonly used to detect aneurysm, thrombosis, and signs
of ischemia in the celiac and mesenteric arteries, and to
locate the source of gastrointestinal bleeding. It is also
used in the diagnosis of a number of conditions,
including portal hypertension, and cirrhosis. The procedure can take up to three hours, depending on the
number of blood vessels studied.
Splenoportography
A splenoportograph is a variation of an angiogram that involves the injection of contrast medium
directly into the spleen to view the splenic and portal
veins. It is used to diagnose blockages in the splenic
vein and portal vein thrombosis and to assess the
strength and location of the vascular system prior to
liver transplantation.
Most angiography procedures are typically paid
for by major medical insurance. Patients should check
with their individual insurance plans to determine
their coverage.
Preparation
Patients undergoing an angiogram are advised to
stop eating and drinking eight hours prior to the procedure. They must remove all jewelry before the procedure and change into a hospital gown. If the arterial
puncture is to be made in the armpit or groin area,
shaving may be required. A sedative may be administered to relax the patient for the procedure. An IV line
will also be inserted into a vein in the patient’s arm
before the procedure begins in case medication or
blood products are required during the angiogram.
Prior to the angiography procedure, patients will
be briefed on the details of the test, the benefits and
risks, and the possible complications involved, and
asked to sign an informed consent form.
Aftercare
Because life-threatening internal bleeding is a possible complication of an arterial puncture, an overnight stay in the hospital is sometimes recommended
following an angiography procedure, particularly with
cerebral and coronary angiograms. If the procedure is
performed on an outpatient basis, the patient is typically kept under close observation for a period of at six
to 12 hours before being released. If the arterial puncture was performed in the femoral artery, the patient
will be instructed to keep his leg straight and relatively
immobile during the observation period. The patient’s
blood pressure and vital signs will be monitored and
the puncture site observed closely. Pain medication
may be prescribed if the patient is experiencing discomfort from the puncture, and a cold pack is applied
to the site to reduce swelling. It is normal for the
puncture site to be sore and bruised for several weeks.
The patient may also develop a hematoma, a hard
mass created by the blood vessels broken during the
procedure. Hematomas should be watched carefully,
as they may indicate continued bleeding of the arterial
puncture site.
Angiography patients are also advised to enjoy
two to three days of rest and relaxation after the
procedure in order to avoid placing any undue stress
on the arterial puncture. Patients who experience continued bleeding or abnormal swelling of the puncture
site, sudden dizziness, or chest pains in the days following an angiography procedure should seek medical
attention immediately.
Patients undergoing a fluorescein angiography
should not drive or expose their eyes to direct sunlight
for 12 hours following the procedure.
Risks
Because angiography involves puncturing an
artery, internal bleeding or hemorrhage are possible
complications of the test. As with any invasive procedure, infection of the puncture site or bloodstream is
also a risk, but this is rare.
A stroke or heart attack may be triggered by an
angiogram if blood clots or plaque on the inside of the
arterial wall are dislodged by the catheter and form a
blockage in the blood vessels or artery. The heart may
also become irritated by the movement of the catheter
through its chambers during pulmonary and coronary
angiography procedures, and arrhythmias may develop.
Patients who develop an allergic reaction to the
contrast medium used in angiography may experience
a variety of symptoms, including swelling, difficulty
breathing, heart failure, or a sudden drop in blood
pressure. If the patient is aware of the allergy before
the test is administered, certain medications can be
administered at that time to counteract the reaction.
Angiography involves minor exposure to radiation through the x rays and fluoroscopic guidance
used in the procedure. Unless the patient is pregnant,
or multiple radiological or fluoroscopic studies are
required, the small dose of radiation incurred during
a single procedure poses little risk. However, multiple
studies requiring fluoroscopic exposure that are conducted in a short time period have been known to
cause skin necrosis in some individuals. This risk can
be minimized by careful monitoring and documentation of cumulative radiation doses administered to
these patients.
Normal results
The results of an angiogram or arteriogram
depend on the artery or organ system being examined. Generally, test results should display a normal
and unimpeded flow of blood through the vascular
system. Fluorescein angiography should result in no
leakage of fluorescein dye through the retinal blood
vessels.
Abnormal results
Abnormal results of an angiography may display
a restricted blood vessel or arterial blood flow (ischemia) or an irregular placement or location of blood
vessels. The results of an angiography vary widely by
the type of procedure performed, and should be interpreted and explained to the patient by a trained
radiologist.