Definition
Angina is pain, ‘‘discomfort,’’ or pressure localized in the chest that is caused by an insufficient
supply of blood (ischemia) to the heart muscle. It is
also sometimes characterized by a feeling of choking,
suffocation, or crushing heaviness. This condition is
also called angina pectoris.
Description
Often described as a muscle spasm and choking
sensation, the term ‘‘angina’’ is used primarily to
describe chest (thoracic) pain originating from insufficient oxygen to the heart muscle. An episode of angina
is not an actual heart attack, but rather pain that results
from the heart muscle temporarily receiving too little
blood. This temporary condition may be the result of
demanding activities such as exercise and does not
necessarily indicate that the heart muscle is experiencing permanent damage. In fact, episodes of angina
seldom cause permanent damage to heart muscle.
Angina can be subdivided further into two categories: angina of effort and variant angina.
Angina of effort
Angina of effort is a common disorder caused by
the narrowing of the arteries (atherosclerosis) that
supply oxygen-rich blood to the heart muscle. In the
case of angina of effort, the heart (coronary) arteries
can provide the heart muscle (myocardium) adequate
blood during rest but not during periods of exercise,
stress, or excitement–any of which may precipitate
pain. The pain is relieved by resting or by administering nitroglycerin, a medication that reduces ischemia
of the heart. Patients with angina of effort have an
increased risk of heart attack (myocardial infarction).
Variant angina
Variant angina is uncommon and occurs independently of atherosclerosis which may, however, be present as an incidental finding. Variant angina occurs at
rest and is not related to excessive work by the heart
muscle. Research indicates that variant angina is
caused by coronary artery muscle spasm of insufficient
duration or intensity to cause an actual heart attack.
Causes and symptoms
Angina causes a pressing pain or sensation of
heaviness, usually in the chest area under the breast
bone (sternum). It occasionally is experienced in the
shoulder, arm, neck, or jaw regions. Because episodes
of angina occur when the heart’s need for oxygen
increases beyond the oxygen available from the
blood nourishing the heart, the condition is often precipitated by physical exertion. In most cases, the symptoms are relieved within a few minutes by resting or by
taking prescribed angina medications. Emotional
stress, extreme temperatures, heavy meals, cigarette
smoking, and alcohol can also cause or contribute to
an episode of angina.
Diagnosis
Physicians can usually diagnose angina based on
the patient’s symptoms and the precipitating factors.
However, other diagnostic testing is often required to
confirm or rule out angina, or to determine the severity of the underlying heart disease.
Electrocardiogram (ECG)
An electrocardiogram is a test that records electrical impulses from the heart. The resulting graph of
electrical activity can show if the heart muscle isn’t
functioning properly as a result of a lack of oxygen.
Electrocardiograms are also useful in investigating
other possible abnormal features of the heart.
Stress test
For many individuals with angina, the results of
an electrocardiogram while at rest will not show any
abnormalities. Because the symptoms of angina occur
during stress, the functioning of the heart may need to
be evaluated under the physical stress of exercise. The
stress test records information from the electrocardiogram before, during, and after exercise in search of
stress-related abnormalities. Blood pressure is also
measured during the stress test and symptoms are
noted. A more involved and complex stress test (for
example, thallium scanning) may be used in some
cases to picture the blood flow in the heart muscle
during the most intense time of exercise and after rest.
Angiogram
The angiogram, which is basically an x ray of the
coronary artery, has been noted to be the most accurate diagnostic test to indicate the presence and extent
of coronary disease. In this procedure, a long, thin,
flexible tube (catheter) is maneuvered into an artery
located in the forearm or groin. This catheter is passed
further through the artery into one of the two major
coronary arteries. A dye is injected at that time to help
the x rays ‘‘see’’ the heart and arteries more clearly.
Many brief x rays are made to create a ‘‘movie’’ of
blood flowing through the coronary arteries, which
will reveal any possible narrowing that causes a
decrease in blood flow to the heart muscle and associated symptoms of angina.
Treatment
Conservative treatment
Artery disease causing angina is addressed initially by controlling existing factors placing the individual at risk. These risk factors include cigarette
smoking, high blood pressure, high cholesterol levels,
and obesity. Angina is often controlled by medication,
most commonly with nitroglycerin. This drug relieves
symptoms of angina by increasing the diameter of the
blood vessels carrying blood to the heart muscle.
Nitroglycerin is taken whenever discomfort occurs or
is expected. It may be taken by mouth by placing the
tablet under the tongue or transdermally by placing a
medicated patch directly on the skin. In addition, beta
blockers or calcium channel blockers may be prescribed
to also decrease the demand on the heart by decreasing
the rate and workload of the heart.
Surgical treatment
When conservative treatments are not effective in
the reduction of angina pain and the risk of heart
attack remains high, physicians may recommend
angioplasty or surgery. Coronary artery bypass surgery is an operation in which a blood vessel (often a
long vein surgically removed from the leg) is grafted
onto the blocked artery to bypass the blocked portion.
This newly formed pathway allows blood to flow adequately to the heart muscle.
Another procedure used to improve blood flow to
the heart is balloon angioplasty. In this procedure, the
physician inserts a catheter with a tiny balloon at the
end into a forearm or groin artery. The catheter is then
threaded up into the coronary arteries and the balloon
is inflated to open the vessel in narrowed sections.
Other techniques using laser and mechanical devices
are being developed and applied, also by means of
catheters.
Alternative treatment
During an angina episode, relief has been noted by
applying massage or kinesiological methods, but these
techniques are not standard recommendations by physicians. For example, one technique places the palm
and fingers of either hand on the forehead while simultaneously firmly massaging the sternum (breast bone)
up and down its entire length using the other hand.
This is followed by additional massaging by the fingertip and thumb next to the sternum, on each side.
Once the angina has subsided, the cause should be
determined and treated. Atherosclerosis, a major associated cause, requires diet and lifestyle adjustments,
primarily including regular exercise, reduction of dietary sugar and saturated fats, and increase of dietary
fiber. Both conventional and alternative medicine
agree that increasing exercise and improving diet are
important steps to reduce high cholesterol levels.
Alternative medicine has proposed specific cholesterol-lowering treatments, with several gaining the
attention and interest of the public. One of the most
recent popular treatments is garlic (Allium sativum).
Some studies have shown that adequate dosages of
garlic can reduce total cholesterol by about 10%,
LDL (bad) cholesterol by 15%, and raise HDL
(good) cholesterol by 10%. Other studies have not
shown significant benefit. Although its effect on cholesterol is not as great as that achieved by medications,
garlic may possibly be of benefit in relatively mild
cases of high cholesterol, without causing the side
effects associated with cholesterol-reducing drugs.
Other herbal remedies that may help lower cholesterol
include alfalfa (Medicago sativa), fenugreek
(Trigonella foenum-graecum), Asian ginseng (Panax
ginseng), and tumeric (Curcuma longa).
Antioxidants, including vitamin A (beta carotene),
vitamin C, vitamin E, and selenium, can limit the oxidative damage to the walls of blood vessels that may
be a precursor of atherosclerotic plaque formation.
Prognosis
The prognosis for a patient with angina depends
on its origin, type, severity, and the general health of
the individual. A person who has angina has the best
prognosis if he or she seeks prompt medical attention
and learns the pattern of his or her angina, such as
what causes the attacks, what they feel like, how long
episodes usually last, and whether medication relieves
the attacks. If patterns of the symptoms change significantly, or if symptoms resemble those of a heart
attack, medical help should be sought immediately.
Prevention
In most cases, the best prevention involves changing one’s habits to avoid bringing on attacks of
angina. If blood pressure medication has been prescribed, compliance is a necessity and should be a
priority as well. Many healthcare professionals–
including physicians, dietitians, and nurses–can provide valuable advice on proper diet, weight control,
blood cholesterol levels, and blood pressure. These
professionals also offer suggestions about current
treatments and information to help stop smoking. In
general, the majority of those with angina adjust their
lives to minimize episodes of angina, by taking necessary precautions and using medications if recommended and necessary. Coronary artery disease is the
underlying problem that should be addressed.