Definition
The term anosmia means lack of the sense of
smell. It may also refer to a decreased sense of smell.
Ageusia, a companion word, refers to a lack of taste
sensation. Patients who actually have anosmia may
complain wrongly of ageusia, although they retain
the ability to distinguish salt, sweet, sour, and bitter–
humans’ only taste sensations.
Description
Of the five senses, smell ranks fourth in importance
for humans, although it is much more pronounced in
other animals. Bloodhounds, for example, can smell an
odor a thousand times weaker than humans. Taste,
considered the fifth sense, is mostly the smell of food
in the mouth. The sense of smell originates from the
first cranial nerves (the olfactory nerves), which sit at
the base of the brain’s frontal lobes, right behind the
eyes and above the nose. Inhaled airborne chemicals
stimulate these nerves.
There are other aberrations of smell beside a
decrease. Smells can be distorted, intensified, or hallucinated. These changes usually indicate a malfunction
of the brain.
Causes and symptoms
The most common cause of anosmia is nasal
occlusion caused by rhinitis (inflammation of thenasal membranes). If no air gets to the olfactory
nerves, smell will not happen. In turn, rhinitis and
nasal polyps (growths on nasal membranes) are caused
by irritants such as allergens, infections, cigarette
smoke, and other air pollutants. Tumors such as
nasal polyps can also block the nasal passages and
the olfactory nerves and cause anosmia. Head injury
or, rarely, certain viral infections can damage or
destroy the olfactory nerves.
Diagnosis
It is difficult to measure a loss of smell, and no one
complains of loss of smell in just one nostril. So a
physician usually begins by testing each nostril separately with a common, non-irritating odor such as
perfume, lemon, vanilla, or coffee. Polyps and rhinitis
are obvious causal agents a physician looks for.
Imaging studies of the head may be necessary in
order to detect brain injury, sinus infection, or tumor.
Treatment
Cessation of smoking is the first step. Many smokers who quit discover new tastes so enthusiastically
that they immediately gain weight. Attention to reducing exposure to other nasal irritants and treatment of
respiratory allergies or chronic upper respiratory
infections will be beneficial. Corticosteroids are particularly helpful.
Alternative treatment
Finding and treating the cause of the loss of smell
is the first approach in naturopathic medicine. If rhinitis is the cause, treating acute rhinitis with herbal mast
cell stabilizers and herbal decongestants can offer some
relief as the body heals. If chronic rhinitis is present,
this is often related to an environmental irritant or to
food allergies. Removal of the causative factors is the
first step to healing. Nasal steams with essential oils
offer relief of the blockage and tonification of the
membranes. Blockages can sometimes be resolved
through naso-specific therapy–a way of realigning
the nasal cavities. Polyp blockage can be addressed
through botanical medicine treatment as well as
hydrotherapy. Olfactory nerve damage may not be
regenerable. Some olfactory aberrations, like intensified sense of smell, can be resolved using homeopathic
medicine.
Prognosis
If nasal inflammation is the cause of anosmia, the
chances of recovery are excellent. However, if nerve
damage is the cause of the problem, the recovery of
smell is much more difficult.