Definition
Anoxia is a condition characterized by an absence
of oxygen supply to an organ or a tissue.
Description
Anoxia results when oxygen is not being delivered
to a part of the body. If the condition does not involve
total oxygen deprivation, it is often called hypoxia,
although the two terms have been used interchangeably. A related condition, anoxemia, occurs when the
blood circulates but contains a below normal amount
of oxygen.
The five types of anoxia or hypoxia include
hypoxemic, anemic, affinity, stagnant, and histotoxic.
Hypoxemic anoxia happens when the oxygen pressure
outside the body is so low that the hemoglobin, the
chemical which carries oxygen in the red blood cells
(RBCs), is unable to become fully loaded with the gas.
This results in too little oxygen reaching the tissues
and can occur in suffocation when a person is at High
altitude, where the pressure of oxygen in the air is
much less than at sea level.
Anemic anoxia results from a decrease in the
amount of hemoglobin or RBCs in the blood, which
reduces the ability to get oxygen to the tissues. Anemia
may result from lack of production of red blood cells
(iron deficiency), blood loss (hemorrhage), or shortened lifespan of red blood cells (autoimmune disease).
Affinity anoxia involves a defect in the chemistry
of the blood such that the hemoglobin can no longer
pick up as much oxygen from the air, even though the
quantities are normal, reducing how much is delivered
to the tissues.
Stagnant anoxia occurs when there is interference
with the blood flow, although the blood and its
oxygen-carrying abilities are normal. A common
cause of general stagnant anoxia is heart disease or
interference with the return of blood flow through the
veins. Examples of local stagnant anoxia include exposure to cold, diseases that restrict circulation to the
extremities, and ergot poisoning. When the tissue or
organ itself has a reduced ability to accept and use the
oxygen, it is called histotoxic anoxia. The classic example is cyanide poisoning, where the chemical inactivates a cellular enzyme necessary for the cell to use
oxygen. Thus, tissue exposed to cyanide cannot use the
oxygen even though it is in normal amounts in the
bloodstream. Histotoxic anoxia can also be caused
by exposure to narcotics, alcohol, formaldehyde, acetone, toluene, and certain anesthetic agents.
Causes and symptoms
Anoxia and hypoxia can be caused by any number
of disease states of the blood,lungs, heart and circulation
including heart attack, severe asthma, or emphysema.
It can also result from smoke or carbon monoxide inhalation, improper exposure to anesthesia, poisoning,
strangulation, near-drowning, or high altitude exposure
through mountain climbing or travel in an insufficiently
pressurized airplane. Anoxia, and the resultant brain
damage, is a particular problem with newborns during
difficult births.
No matter what the cause of anoxia, the symptoms are similar. In severe cases, the patient is often
confused and commonly stuperous or comatose (in a
state of unconsciousness). Depending on the severity
of the injury to the brain, the organ most sensitive to
reduced oxygen intake, this condition can persist for
hours, days, weeks, or even months or years. Seizures,
myoclonic jerks (involuntary muscle spasms or
twitches), and neck stiffness are some other symptoms
of the anoxic condition.
Symptoms of more localized or less complete oxygen deprivation (hypoxia) include increased breathing
rate, lightheadedness, dizziness, tingling or warm sensation, sweating, reduced field of vision, sleepiness, a
bluish tint to skin, particularly the fingertips and lips,
and behavior changes, often an inappropriate sense of
euphoria.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of anoxia and hypoxia is commonly
made through the appearance of clinical symptoms.
However, suspected reduction in oxygen reaching the
tissues can be confirmed using laboratory tests. The
exact test that is performed is dependent on the suspected cause of the anoxia. One systemic measure of
tissue anoxia is the serum lactate (lactic acid) test.
When cells are forced to produce energy without oxygen, as would happen during anoxia, lactic acid is one
of the byproducts. Thus, an increase in lactic acid in
the blood would indicate that tissues were starved for
oxygen and are using non-oxygen pathways to produce energy. Normally, the blood contains less than
2mmol/L of lactic acid. However, some forms of
anoxia do not increase lactic acid concentrations in
the blood and some increases in lactic acid levels are
not associated with anoxia, so an elevated value for
this test is only suggestive of an anoxic or hypoxic
condition.
Treatment
The exact treatment for anoxia is dependent on
the cause of the reduced oxygen reaching the tissues.
However, immediate restoration of tissue oxygen
levels through supplementing the patient’s air supply
with 100% oxygen is a common first step. Secondary
steps often include support of the cardiovascular system through drugs or other treatment, treatment of
lung disease, transfusions, or administration of anecdotes for poisoning, as appropriate.
Prognosis
A good prognosis is dependent on the ability to
treat the underlying cause of the low oxygen levels. If
cardiovascular and respiratory systems can be supported adequately, recovery from the injury to the
tissue is possible, although extent of injury to the
brain can be difficult to assess. The exact amount of
recovery varies with the amount of injury sustained,
where significant injury brings a poorer prognosis. As
recovery occurs, both psychological and neurological
abnormalities may appear, persist, and can improve.
Some problems seen after anoxia include mental confusion, personality changes, amnesia or other types of
memory loss, hallucinations, and persistent myoclonus
(involuntary contractions of the muscles).
Prevention
Hypoxemic anoxia can be avoided by utilizing
supplemental oxygen when in high altitudes and
being aware of the early symptoms of altitude sickness and reducing altitude once recognized. Iron supplements can avoid anemic hypoxia, although more
severe anemic states are usually caused by disease or
bleeding. Maintaining good cardiovascular health
through proper diet and exercise is a good first step
to avoiding the most common cause of stagnant
anoxia. Avoiding exposure to the toxic chemicals
that cause the condition can prevent histotoxic
anoxia.