Definition
Antacids aremedicines that neutralize stomach acid.
Purpose
Antacids are used to relieve acid indigestion, upset
stomach, sour stomach, and heartburn. Additional
components of some formulations include dimethicone, to reduce gas pains (flatulence) and alginic
acid, which, in combination with antacids, may help
manage GERD (gastro-esophageal reflux disease).
Antacids should not be confused with gastric acid
inhibitors, such as the H-2 receptor blockers (cimetidine, ranitide and others) or the proton pump inhibitors
(lansoprazole, omeprazole and others). Although all
three classes of drugs act to reduce the levels of gastric
acid, their mechanisms are different, and this affects
the appropriate use of the drug. Antacids have a rapid
onset and short duration of action, and are most
appropriate for rapid relief of gastric discomfort for
a short period of time.
Antacids may be divided into two classes, those
that work by chemical neutralization of gastric acid,
most notably sodium bicarbonate; and those that act
by adsorption of the acid (non-absorbable antacids),
such as calcium and magnesium salts.
The chemical antacids show the most rapid onset
of action, but may cause ‘‘acid rebound,’’ a condition
in which the gastric acid returns in greater concentration after the drug effect has stopped. Also, since
these antacids may contain high concentrations of
sodium, they may be inappropriate in patients with
hypertension.
Calcium and magnesium salts act by adsorption
of the acid, and are less prone to the rebound effect,
but may have other significant disadvantages. These
antacids are particularly prone to drug interactions,
and patients taking other medications must often
avoid simultaneous administration of the medications. These antacids are more effective in liquid formulations than in tablet or capsule form, and so may
be inconvenient for routine dosing.
The non-absorbable antacids may have additional
uses beyond control of hyperacidity. Calcium salts
may be used as diet supplements in prevention of
osteoporosis. Aluminum carbonate is useful for binding phosphate, and has been effective in treatment and
control of hyperphosphatemia or for use with a low
phosphate diet to prevent formation of phosphate
urinary stones. This application is particularly valuable in patients with chronic renal failure. Antacids
with aluminum and magnesium hydroxides or aluminum hydroxide alone effectively prevent significant
stress ulcer bleeding in post-operative patients or
those with severe burns.
Recommended dosage
The dose depends on the type of antacid. Consult
specific references.
When using antacids in chewable tablet form,
chew the tablet well before swallowing. Drink a glass
of water after taking chewable aluminum hydroxide.
Lozenges should be allowed to dissolve completely in
the mouth. Liquid antacids should be shaken well
before using.
Precautions
Antacids should be avoided if any signs of appendicitis or inflamed bowel are present. These include
cramping, pain, and soreness in the lower abdomen,
bloating, and nausea and vomiting.
Antacids may affect the results of some medical
tests, such as those that measure how much acid
the stomach produces. Health care providers and
patients should keep this in mind when scheduling a
medical test.
Antacids that contain magnesium may cause diarrhea. Other types of antacids may cause constipation.
Avoid taking antacids containing sodium bicarbonate when the stomach is uncomfortably full from
eating or drinking.
Antacids should not be given to children under six
years of age.
Antacids that contain calcium or sodium bicarbonate may cause side effects, such as dizziness, nausea,
and vomiting, in people who consume large amounts
of calcium (from dairy products or calcium supplements). In some cases, this can lead to permanent
kidney damage. Before combining antacids with
extra calcium, check with a physician.
Some antacids contain large amounts of sodium,
particularly sodium bicarbonate (baking soda).
Anyone who is on a low-sodium diet should check
the list of ingredients or check with a physician or
pharmacist before taking an antacid product.
Excessive use of antacids may cause or increase
the severity or kidney problems. Calcium based antacids may lead to renal stone formation.PREGNANCY. Antacids are not classified under
the pregnancy safety categories A, B, C, D and X.
Occasional use of antacids in small amounts during
pregnancy is considered safe. However, pregnant
women should check with their physicians before using
antacids or any other medicines. Pregnant women
who are consuming extra calcium should be aware
that using antacids that contain sodium bicarbonate or
calcium can lead to serious side effects.BREASTFEEDING. Some antacids may pass into
breast milk. However, no evidence exists that the
ingestion of antacids through breast milk causes problems for nursing babies whose mothers use antacids
occasionally.
Side effects
Side effects are very rare when antacids are taken
as directed. They are more likely when the medicine is
taken in large doses or over a long time. Minor side
effects include a chalky taste, mild constipation or
diarrhea, thirst, stomach cramps, and whitish or
speckled stools. These symptoms do not need medical
attention unless they do not go away or they interfere
with normal activities.
Other uncommon side effects may occur. Anyone
who has unusual symptoms after taking antacids
should get in touch with his or her health care provider.
Interactions
Antacids have multiple drug interactions, usually
due to inhibition of absorption of other medications.
In rare cases, the absorbable antacids may alter the
pH of the stomach contents or urine sufficiently to
alter drug absoprtion or excretion. Consult specific
references.