Definition
Anthrax is an infection caused by the bacterium
Bacillus anthracis that primarily affects livestock but
that can occasionally spread to humans, affecting
either the skin, intestines, or lungs. In humans, the
infection can often be treated, but it is almost always
fatal in animals.
Description
Anthrax is most often found in the agricultural
areas of South and Central America, southern and
eastern Europe, Asia, Africa, the Caribbean, and the
Middle East. In the United States, anthrax is rarely
reported; however, cases of animal infection with
anthrax are most often reported in Texas, Louisiana,
Mississippi, Oklahoma, and South Dakota. The bacterium and its associated disease get their name from
the Greek word meaning ‘‘coal’’ because of the characteristic coal-black sore that is the hallmark of the
most common form of the disease.
During the 1800s, in England and Germany,
anthrax was known either as ‘‘wool-sorter’s’’ or ‘‘ragpicker’s’’ disease because workers contracted the disease from bacterial spores present on hides and in
wool or fabric fibers. Spores are the small, thickwalled dormant stage of some bacteria that enable
them to survive for long periods of time under adverse
conditions. The first anthrax vaccine was perfected in
1881 by Louis Pasteur.
The largest outbreak ever recorded in the United
States occurred in 1957 when nine employees of a goat
hair processing plant became ill after handling a contaminated shipment from Pakistan. Four of the five
patients with the pulmonary form of the disease died.
Other cases appeared in the 1970s when contaminated
goatskin drumheads from Haiti were brought into the
U.S. as souvenirs.Today, anthrax is rare, even among cattle, largely
because of widespread animal vaccination. However,
some serious epidemics continue to occur among animal herds and in human settlements in developing
countries due to ineffective control programs. In
humans, the disease is almost always an occupational
hazard, contracted by those who handle animal hides
(farmers, butchers, and veterinarians) or sort wool.
There are no reports of the disease spreading from
one person to another.
Anthrax as a weapon
There has been a great deal of recent concern
that the bacteria that cause anthrax may be used as
a type of biological warfare, since it is possible to
become infected simply by inhaling the spores, and
inhaled anthrax is the most serious form of the
disease. The bacteria can be grown in laboratories,
and with a great deal of expertise and special equipment, the bacteria can be altered to be usable as a
weapon.
The largest-ever documented outbreak of human
anthrax contracted through spore inhalation occurred
in Russia in 1979, when anthrax spores were accidentally released from a military laboratory, causing a
regional epidemic that killed 69 of its 77 victims. In
the United States in 2001, terrorists converted anthrax
spores into a powder that could be inhaled and mailed
it to intended targets, including news agencies and
prominent individuals in the federal government.
Because the United States government considers
anthrax to be of potential risk to soldiers, the
Department of Defense has begun systematic vaccination of all military personnel against anthrax.
For civilians in the United States, the government
has instituted a program called the National
Pharmaceutical Stockpile program in which antibiotics and other medical materials to treat two million
people are located so that they could be received anywhere in the country within twelve hours following a
disaster or terrorist attack.
Causes and symptoms
The naturally occurring bacterium Bacillus
anthracis produces spores that can remain dormant
for years in soil and on animal products, such as
hides, wool, hair, or bones. The disease is often fatal
to cattle, sheep, and goats, and their hides, wool, and
bones are often heavily contaminated.
The bacteria are found in many types of soil, all
over the world, and usually do not pose a problem for
humans because the spores stay in the ground. In
order to infect a human, the spores have to be released
from the soil and must enter the body. They can enter
the body through a cut in the skin, through consuming
contaminated meat, or through inhaling the spores.
Once the spores are in the body, and if antibiotics are
not administered, the spores become bacteria that
multiply and release a toxin that affects the immune
system. In the inhaled form of the infection, the
immune system can become overwhelmed and the
body can go into shock.
Symptoms vary depending on how the disease was
contracted, but the symptoms usually appear within
one week of exposure.
Cutaneous anthrax
In humans, anthrax usually occurs when the
spores enter a cut or abrasion, causing a skin (cutaneous) infection at the site. Cutaneous anthrax, as this
infection is called, is the mildest and most common
form of the disease. At first, the bacteria cause an
itchy, raised area like an insect bite. Within one to
two days, inflammation occurs around the raised
area, and a blister forms around an area of dying tissue
that becomes black in the center. Other symptoms may
include shivering and chills. In most cases, the bacteria
remain within the sore. If, however, they spread to the
nearest lymph node (or, in rare cases, escape into the
bloodstream), the bacteria can cause a form of blood
poisoning that rapidly proves fatal.
Inhalation anthrax
Inhaling the bacterial spores can lead to a rare,
often-fatal form of anthrax known as pulmonary or
inhalation anthrax that attacks the lungs and sometimes
spreads to the brain. Inhalation anthrax begins with flulike symptoms, namely fever, fatigue, headache, muscle
aches, and shortness of breath. As early as one day after
these initial symptoms appear, and as long as two weeks
later, the symptoms suddenly worsen and progress to
bronchitis. The patient experiences difficulty breathing, and finally, the patient enters a state of shock.
This rare form of anthrax is often fatal, even if treated
within one or two days after the symptoms appear.
Intestinal anthrax
Intestinal anthrax is a rare, often-fatal form of the
disease, caused by eating meat from an animal that
died of anthrax. Intestinal anthrax causes stomach
and intestinal inflammation and sores or lesions
(ulcers), much like the sores that appear on the skin
in the cutaneous form of anthrax. The first signs of the
disease are nausea and vomiting, loss of appetite, and
fever, followed by abdominal pain, vomiting of blood,
and severe bloody diarrhea.
Diagnosis
Anthrax is diagnosed by detecting B. anthracis in
samples taken from blood, spinal fluid, skin lesions, or
respiratory secretions. The bacteria may be positively
identified using biochemical methods or using a technique whereby, if present in the sample, the anthrax
bacterium is made to fluoresce. Blood samples will
also indicate elevated antibody levels or increased
amounts of a protein produced directly in response
to infection with the anthrax bacterium. Polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) tests amplify trace amounts of
DNA to show that the anthrax bacteria are present.
Additional DNA-based tests are also currently being
perfected.
Treatment
In the early stages, anthrax is curable by administering high doses of antibiotics, but in the advanced
stages, it can be fatal. If anthrax is suspected, health
care professionals may begin to treat the patient with
antibiotics even before the diagnosis is confirmed
because early intervention is essential. The antibiotics
used include penicillin, doxycycline, and ciprofloxacin. Because inhaled spores can remain in the body for
a long time, antibiotic treatment for inhalation
anthrax should continue for 60 days. In the case of
cutaneous anthrax, the infection may be cured following a single dose of antibiotic, but it is important to
continue treatment so as to avoid potential serious
complications, such as inflammation of the membranes covering the brain and spinal cord (meningitis).
In the setting of potential bioterrorism, cutaneous
anthrax should be treated with a 60-day dose of
antibiotics.
Research is ongoing to develop new antibiotics
and antitoxins that would work against the anthrax
bacteria and the toxins they produce. One Harvard
professor, Dr. R. John Collier, and his team have been
testing two possible antitoxins on rats. A Stanford
microbiologist and a Penn State chemist have also
been testing their new antibiotic against the bacteria
that cause brucellosis and tularemia, as well as
the bacteria that cause anthrax. All of these drugs
are still in early investigational stages, however, and
it is still unknown how these drugs would affect
humans.
Prognosis
Untreated anthrax is often fatal, but death is far
less likely with appropriate care. Ten to twenty percent of patients will die from anthrax of the skin
(cutaneous anthrax) if it is not properly treated. All
patients with inhalation (pulmonary) anthrax will
die if untreated. Intestinal anthrax is fatal 25-75%
of the time.
Prevention
Anthrax is relatively rare in the United States
because of widespread animal vaccination and practices used to disinfect hides or other animal products.
Anyone visiting a country where anthrax is common
or where herd animals are not often vaccinated should
avoid contact with livestock or animal products and
avoid eating meat that has not been properly prepared
and cooked.
Other means of preventing the spread of infection
include carefully handling dead animals suspected of
having the disease, burning (instead of burying) contaminated carcasses, and providing good ventilation
when processing hides, fur, wool, or hair.
In the event that exposure to anthrax spores is
known, such as in the aftermath of a terrorist attack,
a course of antibiotics can prevent the disease from
occurring.
In the case of contaminated mail, as was the case in
the 2001 attacks, the U.S. postal service recommends
certain precautions. These precautions include
inspecting mail from an unknown sender for excessive
tape, powder, uneven weight or lumpy spots, restrictive
endorsements such as ‘‘Personal,’’ or ‘‘Confidential,’’ a
postmark different from the sender’s address, or a
sender’s address that seems false or that cannot be
verified. Handwashing is also recommended after
handling mail. In order to decontaminate batches of
mail before being opened, machines that use bacteriakilling radiation could be used to sterilize the mail.
These machines are similar to systems already in place
on assembly lines for sterile products, such as bandages
and medical devices, but this technique would not be
practical for large quantities of mail. In addition, the
radiation could damage some of the mail’s contents,
such as undeveloped photographic film. Microwave
radiation or the heat from a clothes iron is not powerful
enough to kill the anthrax bacteria.
For those in high-risk professions, an anthrax
vaccine is available that is 93% effective in protecting
against infection. To provide this immunity, an individual should be given an initial course of three injections, given two weeks apart, followed by booster
injections at six, 12, and 18 months and an annual
immunization thereafter.
Approximately 30% of those who have been
vaccinated against anthrax may notice mild local reactions, such as tenderness at the injection site.
Infrequently, there may be a severe local reaction
with extensive swelling of the forearm, and a few
vaccine recipients may have a more general flu-like
reaction to the shot, including muscle and joint
aches, headache, and fatigue. Reactions requiring hospitalization are very rare. However, this vaccine is only
available to people who are at high risk, including
veterinary and laboratory workers, livestock handlers,
and military personnel. The vaccine is not recommended for people who have previously recovered
from an anthrax infection or for pregnant women.
Whether this vaccine would protect against anthrax
used as a biological weapon is, as yet, unclear.