Definition
Ophthalmic antibiotics are medicines that kill bacteria that cause eye infections.
Purpose
Ophthalmic antibiotics are applied to the eye, or
under the eyelid, to treat eyeinfections caused by bacteria.
Description
The medicine described here, tobramycin
(Tobrex), comes in the form of eye drops or ointment.
It is available only with a physician’s prescription.
Recommended dosage
The dosages given here are typical doses. Physicians
may adjust the number of doses per day, the time
between doses, and the length of treatment with the
medicine, depending on the patient’s particular medical
problem. If the physician’s directions are different
from those given here, follow the physician’s directions.
Adults
EYE DROPS. Formild tomoderateinfections, use one
to two drops in the affected eye or eyes every four hours.
For severe infections, use two drops in the affected
eye or eyes every two hours until the condition improves
At that time, the physician will determine how much
to use until the infection is completely cleared up.
 OINTMENT. For mild to moderate infections,
squeeze a half-inch ribbon of ointment into the
affected eye or eyes two or three times a day. Do not
let the tip of the ointment tube touch the eye.
For severe infections, squeeze a half-inch ribbon
of ointment into the affected eye or eyes every three to
four hours until the condition improves. At that time,
the physician will determine how much to use until the
infection is completely cleared up.
Children
The child’s physician should determine the proper
dose.
Precautions
Use this drug as often as directed, for as long as
directed. Although the symptoms may have disappeared, the infection may not clear up completely if
the drug is stopped too soon. Therefore, the medication may be prescribed for several days after the infection appears to have cleared. However, it is just as
important to use the drug for only as long as directed.
Using it for too long may lead to the growth of bacteria that do not respond to the drug. These bacteria
may then cause infections that can be very difficult to
treat. Make sure the physician or pharmacist specifies
how long the medication is to be used.
Anyone who has had an allergic reaction to tobramycin or any other ingredients of Tobrex should not
use this medicine. Be sure to tell the physician about
any past reactions to the drug or its ingredients.
Anyone who has an allergic reaction to tobramycin
should stop using it immediately and call a physician.
Women who are pregnant or breastfeeding or who
plan to become pregnant should check with their physicians before using tobramycin.
Side effects
The main side effects of this medicine are itching,
redness, and swelling of the eye or eyelid. Allergic
reactions also are possible. If any of these symptoms
occur, call the physician who prescribed the medicine.
Interactions
Patients who are using any other prescription or
nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines in their
eyes should check with their physicians before using
tobramycin.