Definition
Antiarrhythmic drugs are medicines that correct
irregular heartbeats and slow down hearts that beat
too fast.
Purpose
Normally, the heart beats at a steady, even pace.
The pace is controlled by electrical signals that begin in
one part of the heart and quickly spread through the
whole heart. If something goes wrong with this control
system, the result may be an irregular heartbeat, or an
arrhythmia. Antiarrhythmic drugs correct irregular
heartbeats, restoring the normal rhythm. If the heart
is beating too fast, these drugs will slow it down. By
correcting these problems, antiarrhythmic drugs help
the heart work more efficiently.
Description
Antiarrhythmic drugs are available only with a
physician’s prescription and are sold in capsule (regular and extended release), tablet (regular and
extended-release), and injectable forms. Commonly
used antiarrhythmic drugs are disopyramide
(Norpace, Norpace CR), procainamide (Procan SR,
Pronestyl, Pronestyl-SR), and quinidine (Cardioquin,
Duraquin, Quinidex, and other brands). Do not confuse quinidine with quinine, which is a related medicine
with different uses, such as relieving leg cramps.
Recommended dosage
The recommended dosage depends on the type of
antiarrhythmic drug and other factors. Doses may be
different for different patients. Check with the physician who prescribed the drug or the pharmacist who
filled the prescription for the correct dosage.
Always take antiarrhythmic drugs exactly as
directed. Never take larger or more frequent doses.
Do not stop taking this medicine without checking
with the physician who prescribed it. Stopping it suddenly could lead to a serious change in heart function.
Antiarrhythmic drugs work best when they are at
constant levels in the blood. To help keep levels constant, take the medicine in doses spaced evenly through
the day and night. Do not miss any doses. If taking
medicine at night interferes with sleep, or if it is difficult
to remember to take the medicine during the day, check
with a health care professional for suggestions.
Precautions
Persons who take these drugs should see their
physician regularly. The physician will check to make
sure the medicine is working as it should and will note
any unwanted side effects.
Some people feel dizzy, lightheaded, or faint when
using these drugs. This medicine may cause blurred
vision or other vision problems. Because of these possible problems, anyone who takes these drugs should
not drive, use machines or do anything else that might
be dangerous until they have found out how the drugs
affect them. If the medicine does cause vision problems, wait until vision is clear before driving or
engaging in other activities that require normal vision.
Antiarrhythmic drugs make some people feel lightheaded, dizzy, or faint when they get up after sitting or
lying down. To lessen the problem, get up gradually
and hold onto something for support if possible.
Anyone taking this medicine should not drink
alcohol without his or her physician’s approval.
Some antiarrhythmic drugs may change the
results of certain medical tests. Before having medical
tests, anyone taking this medicine should alert the
health care professional in charge.
Anyone who is taking antiarrhythmic drugs
should be sure to tell the health care professional in
charge before having any surgical or dental procedures or receiving emergency treatment.
Antiarrhythmic drugs may cause low blood sugar
in some people. Anyone who experiences symptoms of
low blood sugar should eat or drink a food that
contains sugar and call a physician immediately. Signs
of low blood sugar are:

anxiety

confusion

nervousness

shakiness

unsteady walk

extreme hunger

headache

nausea

drowsiness

unusual tiredness or weakness

fast heartbeat

pale, cool skin

chills

cold sweats
Antiarrhythmic drugs may cause dry mouth. To
temporarily relieve the discomfort, chew sugarless gum,
suck on sugarless candy or ice chips, or use saliva substitutes, which come in liquid and tablet forms and are
available without a prescription. If the problem continues for more than 2 weeks, check with a physician or
dentist. Mouth dryness that continues over a long time
may contribute to tooth decay and other dental problems.
People taking antiarrhythmic drugs may sweat
less, which can cause the body temperature to rise.
Anyone who takes this medicine should be careful
not to become overheated during exercise or hot
weather and should avoid hot baths, hot tubs, and
saunas. Overheating could lead to heat stroke.
Older people may be especially sensitive to the
effects of antiarrhythmic drugs. This may increase
the risk of certain side effects, such as dry mouth,
difficult urination, and dizziness or lightheadedness.
The antiarrhythmic drug procainamide can cause
serious blood disorders. Anyone taking this medicine
should have regular blood counts and should check
with a physician if any of the following symptoms occur:

joint or muscle pain

muscle weakness

pain in the chest or abdomen

tremors

wheezing

cough

palpitations

rash, sores, or pain in the mouth

sore throat

fever and chills

loss of appetite

diarrhea
dark urine

yellow skin or eyes

unusual bleeding or bruising

dizziness

hallucinations

depression
Special conditions
People with certain medical conditions or who are
taking certain other medicines may have problems if
they take antiarrhythmic drugs. Before taking these
drugs, be sure to let the physician know about any of
these conditions:
 ALLERGIES. Anyone who has had unusual reactions to an antiarrhythmic drug in the past should let
his or her physician know before taking this type of
medicine again. Patients taking procainamide should
let their physicians know if they have ever had an
unusual or allergic reaction to procaine or any other
‘‘caine-type’’ medicine, such as xylocaine or lidocaine.
Patients taking quinidine should mention any previous reactions to quinine. The physician should also
be told about any allergies to foods, dyes, preservatives, or other substances.
CONGESTIVE HEART DISEASE. Antiarrhythmic
drugs may cause low blood sugar, which can be a
particular problem for people with congestive heart
disease. Anyone with congestive heart disease should
be familiar with the signs of low blood sugar (listed
above) and should check with his or her physician
about what to do if such symptoms occur.
 DIABETES. Antiarrhythmic drugs may cause low
blood sugar, which can be a particular problem for
people with diabetes. Anyone with diabetes should be
familiar with the signs of low blood sugar (listed
above) and should check with his or her physician
about what to do if such symptoms occur.
 PREGNANCY. The effects of taking antiarrhythmic
drugs in pregnancy have not been studied in humans. In
studies of laboratory animals, this medicine increased
the risk of miscarriage. In addition, some women who
have taken these drugs while pregnant have had contractions of the uterus (womb). Women who are pregnant or who may become pregnant should check with
their physicians before taking this medicine. Women
who become pregnant while taking this medicine
should let their physicians know right away.
 BREASTFEEDING. Antiarrhythmic drugs pass into
breast milk. Women who are breastfeeding should
check with their physicians before taking this medicine.
OTHER MEDICAL CONDITIONS. Before using antiarrhythmic drugs, people with any of these medical
problems should make sure their physicians are aware
of their conditions:

heart disorders such as structural heart disease or
inflammation of the heart muscle

congestive heart failure

kidney disease

liver disease

diseases of the blood

asthma or emphysema

enlarged prostate or difficulty urinating

overactive thyroid

low blood sugar

psoriasis

glaucoma

myasthenia gravis

systemic lupus erythematosus
USE OF CERTAIN MEDICINES. Taking antiarrhythmic
drugs with certain other drugs may affect the way the
drugs work or may increase the chance of side effects.
Side effects
The most common side effects are dry mouth and
throat, diarrhea, and loss of appetite. These problems
usually go away as the body adjusts to the drug and do
not require medical treatment. Less common side
effects, such as dizziness, lightheadedness, blurred
vision, dry eyes and nose, frequent urge to urinate,
bloating, constipation, stomach pain, and decreased
sexual ability, also may occur and do not need medical
attention unless they do not go away or they interfere
with normal activities.
More serious side effects are not common, but
may occur. If any of the following side effects occur,
check with the physician who prescribed the medicine
as soon as possible:

fever and chills

difficult urination

swollen or painful joints

pain when breathing

skin rash or itching
People who are especially sensitive to quinidine
may have a reaction to the first dose or doses. If any of
these side effects occur after taking quinidine, check
with a physician immediately:
dizziness

ringing in the ears

breathing problems

vision changes

fever

headache

skin rash
Other rare side effects may occur with any antiarrhythmic drug. Anyone who has unusual symptoms
after taking antiarrhythmic drugs should get in touch
with his or her physician.
Interactions
Antiarrhythmic drugs may interact with other
medicines. When this happens, the effects of one or
both of the drugs may change or the risk of side effects
may be greater. Anyone who takes antiarrhythmic
drugs should let the physician know all other medicines he or she is taking. Among the drugs that may
interact with antiarrhythmic drugs are:

other heart medicines, including other antiarrhythmic drugs

blood pressure medicine

blood thinners

pimozide (Orap), used to treat Tourette’s syndrome
The list above does not include every drug that
may interact with antiarrhythmic drugs. Be sure to
check with a physician or pharmacist before combining antiarrhythmic drugs with any other prescription
or nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicine.