Definition
Antiangiogenesis therapy is one of two types of
drugs in a new class of medicines that restores health
by controlling blood vessel growth. The other medication is called pro-angiogenic therapy.
Purpose
Antiangiogenic therapy inhibits the growth of new
blood vessels. Because new blood vessel growth plays a
critical role in many disease conditions, including
disorders that cause blindness, arthritis, and
cancer, angiogenesis inhibition is a ‘‘common denominator’’ approach to treating these diseases. Antiangiogenic
drugs exert their beneficial effectsin a number of ways: by
disabling the agents that activate and promote cell
growth, or by directly blocking the growing blood vessel
cells. Angiogenesis inhibitory properties have been discoveredinmore than 300 substances, ranging frommolecules produced naturally in animals and plants, such as
green tea extract, to new chemicals synthesized in the
laboratory. A number of medicines already approved
by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
have also been found to possess antiangiogenic properties, including celecoxib (Celebrex), bortezomib
(Velcade), and interferon. Many inhibitors are currently
being tested in clinical trials for a variety of diseases in
human patients, and some in veterinary settings.
These diseases include:

Eye disease—Excessive new blood vessels growing in
the eye can cause vision loss and lead to blindness.
Antiangiogenic treatments may prevent progressive
loss of vision or even improve eyesight in patients.

Arthritis—Blood vessels that invade the joint release
enzymes that destroy cartilage and other tissues in
arthritis. Antiangiogenic drugs may relieve the arthritic
pain and prevent bone joint destruction caused by
these pathological and destructive blood vessels.

Cancer—Tumors recruit their own private blood
supply to obtain oxygen and nourishment for cancer
cells. By cutting off tumor vasculature (the arrangement of blood vessels in the body or in a particular
organ or tissue), antiangiogenesis therapies may literally starve tumors, and prevent their growth and
spread. Antiangiogenesis may also prove to be useful
when combined with conventional chemotherapy or
radiation therapy, as part of a ‘‘multiple warhead’’
approach to attack cancer via different strategies
simultaneously.
Currently, more than 80 antiangiogenic drugs are
being tested worldwide in human clinical trials
sponsored by biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies, top medical centers, and the U.S. National
Cancer Institute. The Angiogenesis Foundation is
leading the application of antiangiogenic therapy in
veterinary medicine, for treatment of certain conditions in dogs, cats, and exotic animal species.
Pro-angiogenic therapy works the opposite way as
antiangiogenic therapy by using angiogenic growth
factors or gene therapy to stimulate blood vessel
growth in tissues that require an improved blood
supply. A number of angiogenic growth factors and
gene therapies are currently undergoing clinical trials
in human patients suffering from the following conditions: ischemic heart disease, stroke, peripheral vascular disease, and chronic wounds.
Precautions
Since antiangiogenic therapy is still experimental,
only people enrolled in a clinical trial of a particular
drug therapy can use it. The only FDA-approved
drug, bevacizumab (Avastin), is prescribed to treat
colon-rectal cancer. Avastin can result in intestinal
perforation and can cause wounds that have been
stitched to break open, sometimes causing death.
Intestinal perforation, sometimes associated with
abscesses inside the abdomen, occurred throughout
treatment with Avastin. Symptoms included abdominal pain associated with constipation and vomiting.
Avastin therapy should be permanently discontinued
in patients with intestinal perforation or wound
breaks requiring medical intervention. Serious, and
in some cases fatal, hemoptysis (coughing up of blood
or mucus containing blood) has occurred in patients
with non-small cell lung cancertreated with chemotherapy and Avastin.
Description
In the late 1990s, many medical researchers believed
that the Holy Grail of cancer treatment had been found.
Antiangiogenesis therapy was safe, elegant, and at first
apparently effective. But the clinical results soon fell
short of expectations. The tumors, it seemed, had
found a way to circumvent even this most ingenious of
treatment approaches. Despite the setbacks, however,
angiogenesis remains a very tempting target, and
researchers are exploring new agents and approaches
to maximize the effects of antiangiogenic therapies.
Newer studies have demonstrated that in addition
to differences in the regulation of new blood vessel formation in cancer compared with normal tissues, the
actual blood vessels that are ‘‘created’’ in cancers are
different from those created in normal tissues. These
differences have allowed a number of antiangiogenic
drugs to be developed that specifically damage tumorassociated blood vessels and not normal vessels. The
goal of these drugs is to attack cancers by damaging
their blood supply. Many antiangiogenic agents also
appear to hasten the death of tumor-associated blood
vessels.
With the success of targeted agents such as the
biotechnology company Genentech’s Avastin, the
only antiangiogenic drug approved by the FDA to
treat cancer, new efforts are underway to widen and
optimize the field of antiangiogenic agents. As oncology (the study of cancer) drug development accelerates,
new indications are beginning to emerge for diseases
such as ocular neovascularization and even obesity.
Antiangiogenic therapy represents a novel, potentially effective, and non-toxic treatment for cancer. It
is likely that these drugs will provide the next major
breakthrough in the management of people and pets
with cancer. Antiangiogenic therapy will likely
become part of the conventional treatment of cancer
and will be used in combination with surgery, radiation therapy and chemotherapy. These agents are
currently in clinical trials and may become available
to both people and pets in the near future.
Antiangiogenic therapy offers a number of advantages over traditional therapies for cancer:

Tumor cells often mutate and become resistant to
chemotherapy. Because antiangiogenic drugs only
target normal endothelial cells (a layer of cells that
lines the inside of certain body cavities, such as blood
vessels), these cells are less likely to develop acquired
drug resistance.

All tumors rely upon host vessels. Antiangiogenic
agents are therefore effective against a broad range
of cancers.

Conventional chemotherapy and radiotherapy indiscriminately attacks all dividing cells in the body,
leading to side effects such as diarrhea, mouth ulcers,
hair loss, and weakened immunity. Antiangiogenic
drugs selectively target dividing blood vessels and
cause fewer side effects.

Antiangiogenic drugs are relatively nontoxic and
work at levels well below the maximum tolerated
dose, so may be given in lower doses over longer
periods of time.

Antiangiogenic treatment may take weeks or even
months to exhibit its full beneficial effect, but this
allows for continuous, chronic control of disease.

Antiangiogenic drugs may also serve as a powerful
supplement to traditional chemotherapy or radiation
therapy.
Preparation
Since antiangiogenic drugs are either injected or
administered orally, little or no preparation is needed.
For injections, the site should be first swabbed with
alcohol.
Aftercare
Little or no aftercare is needed following the
administering of antiangiogenic therapy, except for a
small bandage on the injection site.
Although many of these agents are currently being
tested in clinical trials, no reliable way to monitor the
effects of many, if not most, of these therapeutic
agents on the inhibition of the complicated process
of angiogenesis exists. However, in late 2004, scientists
uncovered critical information that may lead to an
urgently needed method for effectively monitoring
antiangiogenic cancer therapies. The research is likely
to facilitate development of new antiangiogenic drugs
or treatment strategies and allow for accurate determination of the optimal drug doses to use for such
therapies. The researchers found that measuring peripheral blood cells can be used as a reliable way to
monitor antiangiogenic drug activity, which can be
used to help establish the optimal biologic dose of
such drugs.
Risks
In general, early research has found the side
effects of antiangiogenesis agents to be mostly minimal. Because these drugs use proteins that are produced in the human body, there is less likelihood that
they will produce the bad side effects common in
radiation treatments and chemotherapy. Still, one
cancer study found that 6 of the 99 patients taking
an antiangiogenesis drug experienced severe bleeding
in the tumors being treated. Four of those patients
died from this complication.
Since antiangiogenesis drugs could affect a
developing fetus, they will probably not be used
for pregnant women or women who might become
pregnant. They may also need to be stopped before
surgery, since blood vessels that are cut at such
times need to repair themselves. Also, people who
have damaged blood vessels (such as those with
heart disease or stroke) may not be able to take
these drugs. Other side effects in people are being
determined. Doctors, scientists and specialists at
the FDA will be monitoring these other side effects
to better understand the toxicity and risks of these
drugs.
Normal results
Since all antiangiogenic therapies are still experimental and in clinical trials, it is difficult to determine
what normal results should be. The goal of antiangiogenic drugs is to stop the development and spread of
certain diseases, especially some cancers. At least four
major proteins and their receptors and signaling pathways commonly govern angiogenesis in solid tumors:
platelet-derived growth factor, epidermal growth factor, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and
fibroblast growth factor (basic and acidic). Therapies
that either target these molecules or block their signaling pathways should be effective in preventing solid
tumor growth and spread of the cancer by preventing
the formation of new blood vessels.