Definition
Antiangina drugs are medicines that relieve the
symptoms of angina pectoris (severe chest pain).
Purpose
The dull, tight chest pain of angina occurs when the
heart’s muscular wall is not getting enough oxygen. By
relaxing the blood vessels, antiangina drugs reduce the
heart’s work load and increase the amount of oxygenrich blood that reaches the heart. These drugs come in
different forms, and are used in three main ways:

taken regularly over a long period, they reduce the
number of angina attacks.

taken just before some activity that usually brings on
an attack, such as climbing stairs, they prevent attacks.

taken when an attack begins, they relieve the pain
and pressure.
Not every form of antiangina drug can be used in
every way. Some work too slowly to prevent attacks
that are about to begin or to relieve attacks that have
already started. These forms can be used only to
reduce the number of attacks. Be sure to understand
how and when to use the type of antiangina drug that
has been prescribed.
Description
Antiangina drugs, also known as nitrates, come in
many different forms: tablets and capsules that are
swallowed; tablets that are held under the tongue,
inside the lip, or in the cheek until they dissolve;
stick-on patches; ointment; and in-the-mouth sprays.
Commonly used antiangina drugs include isosorbide
dinitrate (Isordil, Sorbitrate, and other brands) and
nitroglycerin (Nitro-Bid, Nitro-Dur, Nitrolingual
Spray, Nitrostat Tablets, Transderm-Nitro, and
other brands). These medicines are available only
with a physician’s prescription.
Recommended dosage
The recommended dosage depends on the type
and form of antiangina drug and may be different
for different patients. Check with the physician who
prescribed the drug or the pharmacist who filled the
prescription for the correct dosage.
Always take antiangina drugs exactly as directed.
The medicine will not work if it is not taken correctly.
Do not stop taking this medicine suddenly after
taking it for several weeks or more, as this could cause
angina attacks to return. If it is necessary to stop taking
the drug, check with the physician who prescribed it
for instructions on how to taper down gradually.
Precautions
Remember that some forms of antiangina drugs
work too slowly to relieve attacks that have already
started. Check with the physician who prescribed the
medicine for instructions on how to use the type that
has been prescribed. Patients who are using sloweracting forms to make attacks less frequent may want
to ask their physicians to prescribe a fast-acting type to
relieve attacks. Another method of treating the frequency of attacks is to increase the dosage of the longacting antiangina drug. Do this only with the approval
of a physician.
These medicines make some people feel lightheaded, dizzy, or faint when they get up after sitting
or lying down. To lessen the problem, get up gradually
and hold onto something for support if possible.
Antiangina drugs may also cause dizziness, lightheadedness, orfainting in hot weather or when people stand
for a long time or exercise. Use caution in all these
situations. Drinking alcohol while taking antiangina
drugs may cause the same problems. Anyone who
takes this medicine should limit the amount of alcohol
consumed.
Because these drugs may cause dizziness, be careful when driving, using machines, or doing anything
else that could be dangerous.
If the person is taking the form of nitroglycerin
that is placed under the tongue and symptoms are not
relieved within three doses taken about 5 minutes
apart, the person should go to the hospital emergency
room as soon as possible. A heart attack may be in
progress.
Some people develop tolerance to antiangina
drugs over time. That is, the drug no longer produces
the desired effects. Anyone who seems to be developing a tolerance to this medicine should check with his
or her physician.
Anyone who has had unusual reactions to antiangina drugs in the past should let his or her physician
know before taking the drugs again. The physician
should also be told about any allergies to foods,
dyes, preservatives, or other substances.
Women who are pregnant or breastfeeding or who
may become pregnant should check with their physicians before using antiangina drugs.
Older people may be especially sensitive to the
effects of antiangina drugs and thus more likely to
have side effects such as dizziness and lightheadedness.
Before using antiangina drugs, people with any of
these medical problems should make sure their physicians are aware of their conditions:

recent heart attack or stroke

kidney disease

liver disease

severe anemia

overactive thyroid

glaucoma

recent head injury
Side effects
A common side effect is a headache just after
taking a dose of the medicine. These headaches usually
become less noticeable as the body adjusts to the drug.
Check with a physician if they are severe or they continue even after taking the medicine for a few weeks.
Unless a physician says to do so, do not change the
dose to avoid headaches. Other common side effects
include dizziness, lightheadedness, fast pulse, flushed
face and neck, nausea or vomiting, and restlessness.
These problems do not need medical attention unless
they do not go away or they interfere with normal
activities.
Other side effects may occur. Anyone who has
unusual symptoms after taking an antiangina drug
should get in touch with his or her physician.
Interactions
Antiangina drugs may interact with other medicines. This may increase the risk of side effects or
change the effects of one or both drugs. Anyone who
takes antiangina drugs should let the physician know
all other medicines he or she is taking. Among the
drugs that may interact with antiangina drugs are:

other heart medicines

blood pressure medicines

aspirin

alcohol

ergot alkaloids used in migraine headaches