Definition
Antihelminthic drugs are used to treat parasitic
infestations.
Purpose
Parasitic infestations are caused by protozoa or
worms gaining entry into the body. Most of these
organisms cause infections by being ingested in the
form of eggs or larvae, usually present on contaminated
food or clothing, while others gain entry through skin
abrasions. Common parasitic infestations include amebiasis, malaria, giardiasis, hookworm, pinworm,
threadworm, whipworm and tapeworm infestations.
Once in the body, parasitic worms may go unnoticed
if they cause no severe symptoms. However, if they
multiply rapidly and spread to a major organ, they
can cause very serious and even life-threatening conditions. Antihelminthic drugs are prescribed to treat these
infestations. They function either by destroying the
worms on contact or by paralyzing them, or by altering
the permeability of their plasma membranes. The dead
worms then pass out of the body in the feces.
Description
Antihelminthic drugs are available only with a
prescription and are available as liquids, tablets or capsules. Some commonly used antihelminthics include:
albendazole (Albenza), mebendazole (Vermox), niclosamide (Niclocide), oxamniquine (Vansil), praziquantel
(Biltricide), pyrantel (Antiminth), pyantel pamoate
(Antiminth) and thiabendazole (Mintezol). Some types
of parasitic infestations are rarely seen in the United
States, thus, the corresponding antihelminthic drugs are
not widely distributed and need to be obtained from the
United States Center for Disease Control (CDC) when
required. These include for example bitional and ivermectin, used to treat onchocerciasis infestations. Other
antihelminthic drugs, such as diethylcarbamazepine
citrate (Hetrezan), used for treatment of roundworms
and other parasites, is supplied directly by its manufacturer when needed.
Most antihelminthic drugs are only active against
specific parasites, some are also toxic. Before treatment, the parasites must therefore be identified using
tests that look for parasites, eggs or larvae in feces,
urine, blood, sputum, or tissues. Thus, niclosamide is
used against tapeworms, but will not be effective for
the treatment of pinworm or roundworm infestations,
because it acts by inhibiting ATP production in tapeworm cells. Thiabendazole (Mintezole) is the drug
usually prescribed for treatment of threadworm, but
a similar drug, mebendazole (Vermox) works better on
whipworm by disrupting the microtubules of this
worm. Praziquantel is another drug that acts by altering the membrane permeability of the worms.
Preparation
Dosage is established depending on the patient’s
general health status and age, the type of antihelminthic drug used, and the type of parasitic infestation
being treated. The number of doses per day, the time
between doses, and the length of treatment will also
depend on these factors.
Antihelminthic drugs must be taken exactly as
directed to completely rid the body of the parasitic
infestation, and for as long as directed. A second
round of treatment may be required to ensure that
the infection has completely cleared.
Precautions
Some antihelminthic drugs work best when ingested
along with fatty foods, such as milk or ice cream. Oral
drugs should be taken with water during or after meals.
The prescribing physician should be informed if the
patient has a low-fat or other special diet.
Some antihelminthic drugs, such as praziquantel,
come in chewable form. These tablets should not be
chewed or kept in the mouth, but should swallowed
whole because their bitter taste may cause gagging or
vomiting.
Antihelminthic drugs sometimes need to be taken
with other medications. For example, steroids such as
prednisone are also prescribed together with the antihelminthic drug for tapeworm to reduce the inflammation that the worm may cause.
When required, pre- or post-treatment purges are
also performed with magnesium or sodium sulfate.
Regular medical visits are recommended for people affected by parasitic infestations. The physician
monitors whether the infection is clearing or not and
also keeps track of unwanted side effects. The prescribing physician should be informed if symptoms
do not disappear or if they get worse.
Hookworm or whipworm infections are also treated with iron supplements along with the antihelminthic prescription.
Some types of parasitic infestations (e.g. pinworms) can be passed from one person to another. It
is then often recommended that everyone in the household of an infected person be asked to also take the
prescribed antihelminthic drug.
Risks
People with the following medical conditions may
have adverse reactions to antihelminthic drugs. The
prescribing physician should accordingly be informed
if any of these conditions are present:

Allergies. Anyone who has had adverse reactions to
antihelminthic drugs should inform the prescribing
physician before taking the drugs again. The physician should also be informed about any other preexisting allergies.

Ulcers. Antihelminthic drugs are also contraindicated for persons diagnosed with ulcers of the digestive tract, especially ulcerative colitis.

Pregnancy. There is research evidence reporting that
some antihelminthic drugs cause birth defects or miscarriage in animal studies. No human birth defects
have been reported, but antihelminthic drugs are
usually not recommended for use during pregnancy.
Pregnant women should accordingly inform the prescribing physician.

Breastfeeding. Some antihelminthic drugs can pass
into breast milk. Breastfeeding may have to be discontinued until the antihelminthic treatment has
ended and breastfeeding mothers must also inform
the prescribing physician.

Other risk conditions. Any of the following medical
conditions should also be reported to the prescribing
physician: Crohn’s disease, liver disease, kidney disease and worm cysts in the eyes.
Common side effects of antihelminthic drugs
include dizziness, drowsiness, headache, sweating, dryness of the mouth and eyes, and ringing in the ears.
Anyone taking these drugs should accordingly avoid
driving, operating machines or other activities that
may be dangerous until they know how they are
affected by the drugs. Side effects usually wear off as
the body adjusts to the drug and do not usually require
medical treatment. Thiabendazole may cause the urine
to have an unusual odor that can last for a day after
the last dose. Other side effects of antihelminthic
drugs, such as loss of appetite, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, or abdominal cramps are less common. If they
occur, they are usually mild and do not require medical attention.
More serious side effects, such as fever, chills,
confusion, extreme weakness, hallucinations, severe
diarrhea, nausea or vomiting, skin rashes, low back
pain, dark urine, blurred vision, seizures, and jaundice
have been reported in some cases. The patient’s physician should be informed immediately if any should
develop. As a rule, anyone who has unusual symptoms
after starting treatment with antihelminthic drugs
should notify the prescribing physician.
Antihelminthic drugs may interact with each
other or with other drugs, whether prescribed or not.
For example, it has been reported that use of the
antihelminthic drugs pyrantel and piperazine together
lowers the efficiency of pyrantel. Similarly, combining
a given antihelminthic drug with another medication
may increase the risk of side effects from either drug.