Definition
Antipsychotic drugs are a class of medicines used
to treat psychosis and other mental and emotional
conditions.
Purpose
Psychosis is defined as ‘‘a serious mental disorder
(as schizophrenia) characterized by defective or lost
contact with reality often with hallucinations or delusions.’’ Psychosis is an end-stage condition arising
from a variety of possible causes. Anti-psychotic
drugs control the symptoms of psychosis, and in
many cases are effective in controlling the symptoms
of other disorders that may lead to psychosis, including bipolar mood disorder (formerly termed manicdepressive), in which the patient cycles from severe
depression to feelings of extreme excitation. This
class of drugs is primarily composed of the major
tranquilizers; however, lithium carbonate, a drug
that is largely specific to bipolar mood disorder, is
commonly classified among the antipsychotic agents.
Description
The antipsychotic agents may be divided by chemical class. The phenothiazines are the oldest group,
and include chlorpromazine (Thorazine), mesoridazine
(Serentil), prochlorperazine (Compazine), and thioridazine (Mellaril). These drugs are essentially similar in
action and adverse effects. They may also be used as
anti-emetics, although prochlorperazine is the drug
most often used for this indication.
The phenylbutylpiperadines are haloperidol
(Haldol) and pimozide (Orap). They find primary
use in control of Tourette’s syndrome. Haloperidol
has been extremely useful in controlling aggressive
behavior.
The debenzapine derivatives, clozapine (Clozaril),
loxapine (Loxitane), olanzapine (Zyprexa) and quetiapine (Seroquel), have been effective in controlling psychotic symptoms that have not been responsive to
other classes of drugs.
The benzisoxidil group is composed of resperidone
(Resperidal) and ziprasidone (Geodon). Resperidone
has been found useful for controlling bipolar mood
disorder, while ziprasidone is used primarily as second-line treatment for schizophrenia.
In addition to these drugs, the class of antipsychotic agents includes lithium carbonate (Eskalith,
Lithonate), which is used for control of bipolar
mood disorder, and thiothixene (Navane), which is
used in the treatment of psychosis.
Newer agents
Some newer antipsychotic drugs have been
approved by the Food and Drug administration
(FDA) in the early 2000s. These drugs are sometimes
called second-generation antipsychotics or SGAs.
Aripiprazole (Abilify), which is classified as a partial
dopaminergic agonist, received FDA approval in
August 2003. Two drugs that are still under investigation, a neurokinin antagonist and a serotonin 2A/2C
antagonist respectively, show promise in the treatment
of schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder.
Recommended dosage
Dose varies with the drug, condition being treated, and patient response. See specific references.
Precautions
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS). NMS is
a rare, idiosyncratic combination of extra-pyramidal
symptoms (EPS), hyperthermia, and autonomic disturbance. Onset may be hours to months after drug
initiation, but once started, proceeds rapidly over
24 to 72 hours. It is most commonly associated with
haloperidol, long-acting fluphenazine, but has occurred
with thiothixene, thioridazine, and clozapine, and may
occur with other agents. NMS is potentially fatal, and
requires intensive symptomatic treatment and immediate discontinuation of neuroleptic treatment. There is
no established treatment. Most patients who develop
NMS will have the same problem if the drug is
restarted.
Agranulocytosis has been associated with clozapine. This is a potentially fatal reaction, but can be
prevented with careful monitoring of the white blood
count. There are no well-established risk factors for
developing agranulocytosis, and so all patients treated
with this drug must follow the clozapine Patient
Management System. For more information, the
reader should call 1-800-448-5938.
Anticholinergic effects, particularly dry mouth,
have been reported with all of the phenothiazines,
and can be severe enough to cause patients to discontinue their medication.
Photosensitization is a common reaction to chlorpromazine. Patients must be instructed to use precautions when exposed to sunlight.
Lithium carbonate commonly causes increased
frequency of urination.
The so-called atypical antipsychotics are associated with a substantial increase in the risk of developing diabetes mellitus. A study done at the University
of Rochester (New York) reported in 2004 that 15.2%
of patients receiving atypical antipsychotics developed
diabetes, compared with 6.3% of patients taking other
antipsychotic medications.
Antipsychotic drugs are pregnancy category C.
(Clozapine is category B.) The drugs in this class
appear to be generally safe for occasional use at low
doses during pregnancy, but should be avoided near
time of delivery. Although the drugs do not appear
to be teratogenic, when used near term, they may
cross the placenta and have adverse effects on the
newborn infant, including causing involuntary
movements. There is no information about safety
in breast feeding.
As a class, the antipsychotic drugs have a large
number of potential side effects, many of them serious.
Because of the potential severity of side effects, these
drugs must be used with special caution in children.
Specific references should be consulted.
Interactions
Because the phenothiazines have anticholinergic
effects, they should not be used in combination with
other drugs that may have similar effects.
Because the drugs in this group may cause hypotension, or low blood pressure, they should be used
with extreme care in combination with blood pressurelowering drugs.
The antipsychotic drugs have a large number of
drug interactions. Consult specific references.