Definition
An antiseptic is a substance which inhibits the
growth and development of microorganisms. For
practical purposes, antiseptics are routinely thought
of as topical agents, for application to skin, mucous
membranes, and inanimate objects, although a formal
definition includes agents which are used internally,
such as the urinary tract antiseptics.
Purpose
Antiseptics are a diverse class of drugs which are
applied to skin surfaces or mucous membranes for
their anti-infective effects. This may be either bacteriocidal or bacteriostatic. Their uses include cleansing
of skin and wound surfaces after injury, preparation of
skin surfaces prior to injections or surgical procedures,
and routine disinfection of the oral cavity as part of a
program of oral hygiene. Antiseptics are also used for
disinfection of inanimate objects, including instruments and furniture surfaces.
Commonly used antiseptics for skin cleaning
include benzalkonium chloride, chlorhexidine, hexachlorophine, iodine compounds, mercury compounds,
alcohol and hydrogen peroxide. Other agents which
have been used for this purpose, but have largely been
supplanted by more effective or safer agents, include
boric acid and volatile oils such as methyl salicylate
(oil of wintergreen.)
Chlorhexidine shows a high margin of safety when
applied to mucous membranes, and has been used in
oral rinses and preoperative total body washes.
Benzalkonium chloride and hexachlorophine are
used primarily as hand scrubs or face washes.
Benzalkonium may also find application is a disinfecting agent for instruments, and in low concentration as
a preservative for drugs including ophthalmic solutions. Benzalkonium chloride is inactivated by organic
compounds, including soap, and must not be applied
to areas which have not been fully rinsed.
Iodine compounds include tincture of iodine and
povidone iodine compounds. Iodine compounds have
the broadest spectrum of all topical anti-infectives, with
action against bacteria, fungi, viruses, spores, protozoa,
and yeasts. Iodine tincture is highly effective, but its
alcoholic component is drying and extremely irritating
when applied to abraided (scraped or rubbed) skin.
Povidone iodine, an organic compound, is less irritating
and less toxic, but not as effective. Povidone iodine has
been used for hand scrubs and disinfection of surgical
sites. Aqueous solutions of iodine have also been used
as antiseptic agents, but are less effective than alcoholic
solutions and less convenient to use that the povidone
iodine compounds.
Hydrogen peroxide acts through the liberation of
oxygen gas. Although the antibacterial activity of hydrogen peroxide is relatively weak, the liberation of oxygen
bubbles produces an effervescent action, which may be
useful for wound cleansing through removal of tissue
debris. The activity of hydrogen peroxide may be
reduced by the presence of blood and pus. The appropriate concentration of hydrogen peroxide for antiseptic
use is 3%, although higher concentrations are available.
Thimerosol (Mersol) is a mercury compound with
activity against bacteria and yeasts. Prolonged use
may result in mercury toxicity.
Recommended dosage
Dosage varies with product and intended use.
Consult individualized references.
Precautions
Precautions vary with individual product and use.
Consult individualized references.
Hypersensitivity reactions should be considered
with organic compounds such as chlorhexidine, benzalkonium and hexachlorophine.
Skin dryness and irritation should be considered
with all products, but particularly with those containing alcohol.
Systemic toxicity may result from ingestion of
iodine containing compounds or mercury compounds.
Chlorhexidine should not be instilled into the ear.
There is one anecdotal report of deafness following
use of chlorhexidine in a patient with a perforated
eardrum. Safety in pregnancy and breastfeeding have
not been reported, however there is one anecdotal
report of an infant developing slowed heartbeat
apparently related to maternal use of chlorhexidine.
Iodine compounds should be used sparingly
during pregnancy and lactation due to risk of infant
absorption of iodine with alterations in thyroid function.
Interactions
Antiseptics are not known to interact with any
other medicines. However, they should not be used
together with any other topical cream, solution, or
ointment.