Definition
Antiulcer drugs are a class of drugs, exclusive of
the antibacterial agents, used to treat ulcers in the
stomach and the upper part of the small intestine.
Purpose
Recurrent gastric and duodenal ulcers are caused
by Helicobacter pylori infections, and are treated
with combination treatments that incorporate antibiotic therapy with gastric acid suppression.
Additionally, bismuth compounds have been used.
The primary class of drugs used for gastric acid
suppression are the proton pump inhibitors, omeprazole, lansoprazole, pantoprazole and rabeprazole. The
H-2 receptor blocking agents, cimetidine, famotidine,
nizatidine, and ranitidine have been used for this
purpose, but are now more widely used for maintenance therapy after treatment with the proton pump
inhibitors. Sucralfate, which acts by forming a protective coating over the ulcerate lesion, is also used in
ulcer treatment and may be appropriate for patients in
whom other classes of drugs are not indicated, or those
whose gastric ulcers are caused by non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) rather than H. pylori
infections.
Description
The proton pump inhibitors block the secretion of
gastric acid by the gastric parietal cells. The extent of
inhibition of acid secretion is dose related. In some
cases, gastric acid secretion is completely blocked for
over 24 hours on a single dose. In addition to their role
in treatment of gastric ulcers, the proton pump inhibitors are used to treat syndromes of excessive acid
secretion (Zollinger-Ellison Syndrome) and gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
Histamine H-2 receptor blockers stop the action
of histamine on the gastric parietal cells, inhibiting the
secretion of gastric acid. These drugs are less effective
than the proton pump inhibitors, but may achieve a
75–79% reduction in acid secretion. Higher rates of
acid inhibition may be achieved when the drug is
administered by the intravenous route. The H-2 receptor blockers may also be used to treat heartburn and
hypersecretory syndromes. When given before surgery, the H-2 receptor blockers are useful in prevention of aspiration pneumonia.
Sucralfate (Carafate), a substituted sugar molecule
with no nutritional value, does not inhibit gastric acid,
but rather, reacts with existing stomach acid to form a
thick coating that covers the surface of an ulcer, protecting the open area from further damage. A secondary
effect is to act as an inhibitor of the digestive enzyme
pepsin. Sucralfate does not bind to the normal stomach
lining. The drug has been used for prevention of stress
ulcers, the type seen in patients exposed to physical stress
such as burns and surgery. It has no systemic effects.
Recommended dosage
The doses of the proton pump inhibitors and H-2
receptor blockers vary depending on the drug and
condition being treated. Consult individual references.
The dose of sucralfate for acute ulcer therapy is
1 gram four times a day. After the ulcer has healed,
maintenance treatment may continue at 1 gram two
times daily.
Precautions
The proton pump inhibitors are generally well
tolerated, and the most common adverse effects are
diarrhea, itching, skin rash, dizziness and headache.
Muscle aches and a higher than normal rate of respiratory infections are among the other adverse reactions
reported. Omeprazole has an increased rate of fetal
deaths in animal studies. It is not known if these drugs
are excreted in human milk, but because of reported
adverse effects to infants in animal studies, it is recommended that proton pump inhibitors not be used by
nursing mothers.
The H-2 receptor blockers vary widely in their
adverse effects. Although they are generally well tolerated, cimetidine may cause confusion in elderly
patients, and has an antiandrogenic effect that may
cause sexual dysfunction in males. Famotidine has
been reported to cause headache in 4.7% of patients.
It is advisable that mothers not take H-2 receptor
blockers while nursing.
Sucralfate is well tolerated. It is poorly absorbed,
and its most common side effect is constipation in 2%
of patients. Diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, gastric discomfort, indigestion, flatulence, dry mouth, rash, pruritus (itching), back pain, headache, dizziness,
sleepiness, and vertigo have been reported, as well as
rare allergic responses. Because sucralfate releases
small amounts of aluminum into the system, it should
be used with caution in patients with renal insufficiency. There is no information available about sucralfate’s safety in breastfeeding.
Interactions
Proton pump inhibitors may increase the pH of
the stomach. This will inactivate some antifungal
drugs that require an acid medium for effectiveness,
notable itraconazole and ketoconazole.
H-2 receptor blocking agents have a large number
of drug interactions. Consult individualized references.
Sucralfate should not be used with aluminum
containing antacids, because of the risk of increased
aluminum absorption. Sucralfate may inhibit
absorption and reduce blood levels of anticoagulants, digoxin, quinidine, ketoconazole, quinolones
and phenytoin.