Definition
Antibiotics may be informally defined as the subgroup of anti-infectives that are derived from bacterial
sources and are used to treat bacterial infections.
Other classes of drugs, most notably the sulfonamides,
may be effective antibacterials. Similarly, some antibiotics may have secondary uses, such as the use of
demeclocycline (Declomycin, a tetracycline derivative) to treat the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH) secretion. Other antibiotics
may be useful in treating protozoal infections.
Purpose
Antibiotics are used for treatment or prevention
of bacterial infection.
Description
Classifications
Although there are several classification schemes
for antibiotics, based on bacterial spectrum (broad
versus narrow) or route of administration (injectable
versus oral versus topical), or type of activity (bactericidal vs. bacteriostatic), the most useful is based on
chemical structure. Antibiotics within a structural
class will generally show similar patterns of effectiveness, toxicity, and allergic potential.
 PENICILLINS. The penicillins are the oldest class of
antibiotics, and have a common chemical structure
which they share with the cephalopsorins. The two
groups are classed as the beta-lactam antibiotics, and
are generally bacteriocidal—that is, they kill bacteria
rather than inhibiting growth. The penicillins can be
further subdivided. The natural pencillins are based on
the original penicillin G structure; penicillinase-resistant
penicillins, notably methicillin and oxacillin, are active
even in the presence of the bacterial enzyme that inactivates most natural penicillins. Aminopenicillins such as
ampicillin and amoxicillin have an extended spectrum
of action compared with the natural penicillins;
extended spectrum penicillins are effective against a
wider range of bacteria. These generally include coverage for Pseudomonas aeruginaosa and may provide the
penicillin in combination with a penicillinase inhibitor.
 CEPHALOSPORINS. Cephalosporins and the closely
related cephamycins and carbapenems, like the pencillins, contain a beta-lactam chemical structure.
Consequently, there are patterns of cross-resistance
and cross-allergenicity among the drugs in these
classes. The ‘‘cepha’’ drugs are among the most diverse
classes of antibiotics, and are themselves subgrouped
into 1st, 2nd and 3rd generations. Each generation has
a broader spectrum of activity than the one before. In
addition, cefoxitin, a cephamycin, is highly active
against anaerobic bacteria, which offers utility in treatment of abdominal infections. The 3rd generation
drugs, cefotaxime, ceftizoxime, ceftriaxone and others,
cross the blood-brain barrier and may be used to treat
meningitis and encephalitis. Cephalopsorins are the
usually preferred agents for surgical prophylaxis.
 FLUROQUINOLONES. The fluroquinolones are synthetic antibacterial agents, and not derived from bacteria.
They are included here because they can be readily interchanged with traditional antibiotics. An earlier, related
class of antibacterial agents, the quinolones, were not
well absorbed, and could be used only to treat urinary
tract infections. The fluroquinolones, which are based
on the older group, are broad-spectrum bacteriocidal
drugs that are chemically unrelated to the penicillins or
the cephaloprosins. They are well distributed into bone
tissue, and so well absorbed that in general they are as
effective by the oral route as by intravenous infusion.
 TETRACYCLINES. Tetracyclines got their name
because they share a chemical structure that has four
rings. They are derived from a species of Streptomyces
bacteria.Broad-spectrum bacteriostatic agents, the tetracyclines may be effective against a wide variety of microorganisms, including rickettsia and amoebic parasites.
 MACROLIDES. The macrolide antibiotics are
derived from Streptomyces bacteria, and got their
name because they all have a macrocyclic lactone
chemical structure. Erythromycin, the prototype of
this class, has a spectrum and use similar to penicillin.
Newer members of the group, azithromycin and
clarithyromycin, are particularly useful for their high
level of lung penetration. Clarithromycin has been
widely used to treat Helicobacter pylori infections,
the cause of stomach ulcers.
 OTHERS. Other classes of antibiotics include the
aminoglycosides, which are particularly useful for
their effectiveness in treating Pseudomonas aeruginosa
infections; the lincosamindes, clindamycin and lincomycin, which are highly active against anaerobic
pathogens. There are other, individual drugs which
may have utility in specific infections.
Recommended dosage
Dosage varies with drug, route of administration,
pathogen, site of infection, and severity. Additional
considerations include renal function, age of patient,
and other factors. Consult manufacturers’ recommendations for dose and route.
Side effects
All antibiotics cause risk of overgrowth by nonsusceptible bacteria. Manufacturers list other major
hazards by class; however, the health care provider
should review each drug individually to assess the degree
of risk. Generally, breastfeeding is not recommended
while taking antibiotics because of risk of alteration to
infant’s intestinal flora, and risk of masking infection in
the infant. Excessive or inappropriate use may promote
growth of resistant pathogens.
Penicillins: Hypersensitivity may be common, and
cross allergenicity with cephalosporins has been reported.
Penicillins are classed as category B during pregnancy.
Cephalopsorins: Several cephalopsorins and
related compounds have been associated with seizures.
Cefmetazole, cefoperazone, cefotetan and ceftriaxone
may be associated with a fall in prothrombin activity
and coagulation abnormalities. Pseudomembranous
colitis has been reported with cephalosporins and
other broad spectrum antibiotics. Some drugs in this
class may cause renal toxicity. Pregnancy category B.
Fluroquinolones: Lomefloxacin has been associated
withincreasedphotosensitivity.All drugsin this class have
been associated with convulsions. Pregnancy category C.
Tetracyclines: Demeclocycline may cause increased
photosensitivity. Minocycline may cause dizziness.
Do not use tetracyclines in children under the age of
eight, and specifically avoid during periods of tooth
development. Oral tetracyclines bind to anions such as
calcium and iron. Although doxycycline and minocycline may be taken with meals, patients must be advised
to take other tetracycline antibiotics on an empty stomach, and not to take the drugs with milk or other
calcium-rich foods. Expired tetracycline should never
be administered. Pregnancy category D. Use during
pregnancy may cause alterations in bone development.
Macrolides: Erythromycinmay aggravate the weakness of patients with myasthenia gravis. Azithromycin
has, rarely, been associated with allergic reactions,
including angioedema, anaphylaxis, and dermatologic
reactions, including Stevens-Johnson syndrome and
toxic epidermal necrolysis. Oral erythromycin may be
highly irritating to the stomach and when given by
injection may cause severe phlebitis. These drugs should
be used with caution in patients with liver dysfunction.
Pregnancy category B: Azithromycin, erythromycin. Pregnancy category C: Clarithromycin, dirithromycin, troleandomycin.
Aminoglycosides: This class of drugs causes kidney and ototoxicity. These problems can occur even
with normal doses. Dosing should be based on renal
function, with periodic testing of both kidney function
and hearing. Pregnancy category D.
Recommended usage
To minimize risk of adverse reactions and development of resistant strains of bacteria, antibiotics should
be restricted to use in cases where there is either known
or a reasonable presumption of bacterial infection. The
use of antibiotics in viral infections is to be avoided.
Avoid use of fluroquinolones for trivial infections.
In severe infections, presumptive therapy with a
broad-spectrum antibiotic such as a 3rd generation
cephalosporin may be appropriate. Treatment should
be changed to a narrow spectrum agent as soon as the
pathogen has been identified. After 48 hours of treatment, if there is clinical improvement, an oral antibiotic should be considered.