Definition
Antispasmodic drugs relieve cramps or spasms of
the stomach, intestines, and bladder.
Purpose
Antispasmodic drugs have been used to treat
stomach cramps. Traditionally, they were used to
treat stomach ulcers, but for this purpose they have
largely been replaced by the acid inhibiting
compoundsa, the H-2 receptor blockers such as
cimetidine and ranitidine and the proton pump
inhibtors such as omeprazole, lansoprazole and
rabetazole.
Most of the drugs used for this purpose as ‘‘anticholinergics’’, since they counteract the effects of the
neurohormone acetylcholine. Some of these drugs are
derived from the plant belladonna, also known as
Deadly Nightshade. There is also a group of drugs
with similar activity, but not taken from plant sources.
The anticholingergics decrease both the movements of
the stomach and intestine, and also the secretions of
stomach acid and digestive enzymes. They may be
used for other purposes including treatment of
Parkinson’s Disease, and bladder urgency. Because
these drugs inhibit secretions, they cause dry mouth
and dry eyes because of reduced salivation and tearing. Dicyclomine is an antispasmodic with very lettle
effect on secretions. It is used to treat irritable bowel
syndrome.
Description
Dicyclomine is available only with a prescription
and is sold as capsules, tablets (regular and extendedrelease forms), and syrup.
Recommended dosage
The usual dosage for adults is 20 mg, four times a
day. However, the physician may recommend starting
at a lower dosage and gradually increasing the dose to
reduce the chance of unwanted side effects.
The dosage for children depends on the child’s
age. Check with the child’s physician for the correct
dosage.
Precautions
Dicyclomine makes some people sweat less,
which allows the body to overheat and may lead to
heat prostration (fever and heat stroke). Anyone
taking this drug should try to avoid extreme heat.
If that is not possible, check with the physician
who prescribed the drug. If heat prostration occurs,
stop taking the medicine and call a physician
immediately.
This medicine can cause drowsiness and blurred
or double vision. People who take this drug should not
drive, use machines, or do anything else that might be
dangerous until they have found out how the medicine
affects them.
Dicyclomine should not be given to infants or
children unless the physician decides the use of this
drug is necessary. Diclyclomine should not be used by
women who are breast feeding. Women who are pregnant or plan to become pregnant should check with
their physicians before using this drug.
Anyone with the following medical conditions
should not take dicyclomine unless directed to do so
by a physician:
 Previous sensitivity or allergic reaction to
dicyclomine
 Glaucoma
 Myasthenia gravis
 Blockage of the urinary tract, stomach, or intestines
 Severe ulcerative colitis
 Reflux esophagitis.

 In addition, patients with these conditions should
check with their physicians before using dicyclomine:
 Liver disease
 Kidney disease
 High blood pressure
 Heart problems
 Enlarged prostate gland
 Hiatal hernia
 Autonomic neuropathy (a nerve disorder)
 Hyperthyroidism.
Side effects
The most common side effects are dizziness, drowsiness, lightheadedness, nausea, nervousness, blurred
vision, dry mouth, and weakness. Other side effects
may occur. Anyone who has unusual symptoms after
taking dicyclomine should get in touch with his or her
physician.
Interactions
Dicyclomine may interact with other medicines.
When this happens, the effects of one or both of the
drugs may change or the risk of side effects may be
greater. Among the drugs that may interact with
Dicyclomine are:
 Antacids such as Maalox
 Antihistamines such as clemastine fumarate (Tavist)
 Bronchodilators (airway opening drugs) such as
albuterol (Proventil, Ventolin)
 Corticosteroids such as prednisone (Deltasone)
 Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAO inhibitors) such
as phenelzine (Nardil) and tranylcypromine (Parnate)
 Tranquilizers such as diazepam (Valium) and alprazolam (Xanax).
The list above does not include every drug that
may interact with dicyclomine. Be sure to check with a
physician or pharmacist before combining dicyclomine with any other prescription or nonprescription
(over-the-counter) medicine.