Definition
Antihemorrhoid drugs are medicines that reduce
the swelling and relieve the discomfort of hemorrhoids
(swellings in the area around the anus).
Purpose
Hemorrhoids are bulges in the veins that supply
blood to the skin and membranes of the area around
the anus. They may form for various reasons.
Frequent heavy lifting, sitting for long periods, or
straining to have bowel movements may put stress
on anal tissues, which can lead to hemorrhoids.
Some women develop hemorrhoids during pregnancy
as the expanding uterus puts pressure on the anal
tissues. The strain of labor and delivery can also
cause hemorrhoids or make existing hemorrhoids
worse. Hemorrhoids sometimes result from certain
medical problems, such as tumors pressing on the
lower bowel.
The main symptoms of hemorrhoids are bleeding
from the rectum, especially after a bowel movement,
and itching, burning, pain, and general discomfort in
the anal area. Over-the-counter antihemorrhoid products can relieve many of these symptoms. The products contain combinations of four main types of
ingredients:

Local anesthetics, such as benzocaine, lidocaine and
tetracaine, to temporarily relieve the pain

Vasoconstrictors, such as epinephrine base, epinephrine hydrochloride, ephedrine sulfate and phenylephrine hydrochloride that reduce swelling and relieve
itching and discomfort by tightening blood vessels

Astringents (drying agents), such as witch hazel, calamine, and zinc oxide. These help shrink hemorrhoids
by pulling water out of the swollen tissue. This, in
turn, helps relieve itching, burning, and irritation.

Protectants, such as cocoa butter, lanolin, glycerin,
mineral oil, and shark liver oil which soothe irritated
tissues and form a protective barrier to prevent
further irritation.
Description
Antihemorrhoid drugs are available as creams,
ointments and suppositories. Most can be bought
without a physician’s prescription.
Recommended dosage
Follow package instructions for using these products. Do not use more than the recommended
amount of this medicine every day. For explanations
or further information about how to use antihemorrhoid drugs, check with a physician or pharmacist.
Precautions
Do not use antihemorrhoid drugs for more than
seven days in a row. If the problem gets worse or does
not improve, check with a physician.
If rectal bleeding continues, check with a physician. This could be a sign of a condition that needs
medical attention.
Side effects
Side effects are rare, however, if a rash or any
other sign of an allergic reaction occurs, stop using
the medicine.
Interactions
Some antihemorrhoid drugs should not be used
by people who are taking or have recently taken monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAO inhibitors), such as
phenelzine (Nardil) or tranylcypromine (Parnate),
used to treat conditions including depression and
Parkinson’s disease. Anyone who is not sure if he or
she has taken this type of drug should check with a
physician or pharmacist before using an antihemorrhoid drug. People who are taking antidepressants or
medicine for high blood pressure also should not use
certain antihemorrhoid drugs. Check with a pharmacist for a list of drugs that may interact with specific
antihemorrhoid drugs.