Definition
Antimigraine drugs are medicines used to prevent
or reduce the severity of migraine headaches.
Purpose
Migraine headaches usually cause a throbbing
pain on one side of the head. Nausea, vomiting, dizziness, increased sensitivity to light and sound, and
other symptoms may accompany the pain. The attacks
may last for several hours or for a day or more and
may come as often as several times a week. Some
people who get migraine headaches have warning signals before the headaches begin, such as restlessness,
tingling in an arm or leg, or seeing patterns of flashing
lights. This set of signals is called an aura. The antimigraine drugs discussed in this section are meant to
be taken as soon as the pain begins, to relieve the pain
and other symptoms. Other types of drugs, such as
antiseizure medicines, antidepressants, calcium channel blockers and beta blockers, are sometimes prescribed to prevent attacks in people with very severe
or frequent migraines.
Description
Migraine is thought to be caused by electrical and
chemical imbalances in certain parts of the brain.
These imbalances affect the blood vessels in the
brain – first tightening them up, then widening them.
As the blood vessels widen, they stimulate the release
of chemicals that increase sensitivity to pain and cause
inflammation and swelling. Antimigraine drugs are
believed to work by correcting the imbalances and by
tightening the blood vessels.
Examples of drugs in this group are ergotamine
(Cafergot), naratriptan (Amerge), sumatriptan
(Imitrex), rizatriptan (Maxalt), almotriptan (Axert),
and zolmitriptan (Zomig). Methysergide maleate
(Sansert) may be used by patients whose headaches
are not controlled by other drugs, while some patients
do well on other drugs. For example, combinations
or ergotamine and caffeine may be very effective.
The caffeine acts by constricting blood vessels to
relieve the headache. Sometimes, an analgesic such
as acetaminophen, caffeine, and a barbiturate which
acts as a sedative, are combined, as in Fioricet and
similar compounds. These medicines are available
only with a physician’s prescription and come in
several forms. Ergotamine is available as tablets
and rectal suppositories; sumatriptan as tablets,
injections, and nasal spray; and zolmitriptan as
tablets.
Antimigraine drugs are used to treat headaches
once they have started. These drugs should not be
taken to prevent headaches.
Some patients are given anti-epileptic drugs,
which are also known as anticonvulsants, to treat
migraine headaches. As of 2003, sodium valproate
(Epilim) is the only anticonvulsant approved by the
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for prevention of migraine. Such newer anticonvulsants as
gabapentin (Neurontin) and topiramate (Topamax)
are being evaluated as migraine preventives as of
early 2004.
Recommended dosage
Recommended dosage depends on the type of
drug. Typical recommended dosages for adults are
given below for each type of drug.
Ergotamine
Take at the first sign of a migraine attack. Patients
who get warning signals (aura) may take the drug as
soon as they know a headache is coming.
 TABLETS. No more than 6 tablets for any single
attack.
No more than 10 tablets per week.
 SUPPOSITORIES. No more than 2 suppositories for
any single attack.
No more than 5 suppositories per week.
Naratriptan
Take as soon as pain or other migraine symptoms
begin. Also effective if taken any time during an
attack. Do not take the drug until the pain actually
starts as not all auras result in a migraine.
 TABLETS. Usual dose is one 1-mg tablet taken with
water or other liquid.
Doses of 2.5-mg may be used, but they may cause
more side effects.
If the headache returns or if there is only partial
response, the dose may be repeated once after 4 hours,
for a maximum dose of 5 mg in a 24-hour period.
Larger doses do not seem to offer any benefit.
Sumatriptan
Take as soon as pain or other migraine symptoms
begin. Also effective if taken any time during an
attack. Do not take the drug until the pain actually
starts as not all auras result in a migraine.
 TABLETS. Usual dose is one 25-mg tablet, taken
with water or other liquid.
Doses should be spaced at least 2 hours apart.
Anyone with liver disease should consult with a
physician for proper dosing.
 INJECTIONS. No more than 6 mg per dose, injected
under the skin.
No more than two 6-mg injections per day. These
doses should be taken at least 1 hour apart.
Zolmitriptan
Take as soon as symptoms begin.
 TABLETS. Usual dose is 1–5 mg. Additional doses
may be taken at 2-hour intervals.
No more than 10 mg per 24 hour period.
General dosage advice
Always take antimigraine drugs exactly as directed. Never take larger or more frequent doses, and do
not take the drug for longer than directed.
If possible, lie down and relax in a dark, quiet
room for a few hours after taking the medicine.
Precautions
These drugs should be used only to treat the type
of headache for which they were prescribed. Patients
should not use them for other headaches, such as those
caused by stress or too much alcohol, unless directed
to do so by a physician.
Anyone whose headache is unlike any previous
headache should check with a physician before taking
these drugs. If the headache is far worse than any
other, emergency medical treatment should be sought
immediately.
Taking too much of the antimigraine drug ergotamine (Cafergot), can lead to ergot poisoning. Symptoms
include headache, muscle pain, numbness, coldness, and
unusually pale fingers and toes. If not treated, the condition can lead to gangrene (tissue death).
Sumatriptan (Imitrex), naratriptan (Amerge),
rizatriptan (Maxalt) and zolmitriptan (Zomig) may
interact with ergotamine. These drugs should not be
taken within 24 hours of taking any drug containing
ergotamine.
Some antimigraine drugs work by tightening
blood vessels in the brain. Because these drugs also
affect blood vessels in other parts of the body, people
with coronary heart disease, circulatory problems, or
high blood pressure should not take these medicines
unless directed to do so by their physicians.
About 40% of all migraine attacks do not
respond to treatment with triptans or any other
medication. If the headache lasts longer than 72
hours—a condition known as status migrainosus—
the patient may be given narcotic medications to
bring on sleep and stop the attack. Patients with
status migrainosus are often hospitalized because
they are likely to be dehydrated from severe nausea
and vomiting.
Special conditions
People with certain other medical conditions or
who are taking certain other medicines can have problems if they take antimigraine drugs. Before taking
these drugs, be sure to let the physician know about
any of these conditions:
 ALLERGIES. Anyone who has had unusual reactions to ergotamine, caffeine, sumatriptan, zolmitriptan, or other antimigraine drugs in the past should let
his or her physician know before taking the drugs
again. The physician should also be told about any
allergies to foods, dyes, preservatives, or other
substances.
 PREGNANCY. Women who are pregnant should
not take ergotamine (Cafergot). The effects of other
antimigraine drugs during pregnancy have not been
well studied. Any woman who is pregnant or plans to
become pregnant should let her physician know before
an antimigraine drug is prescribed.
 BREASTFEEDING. Some antimigraine drugs can
pass into breast milk and may cause serious problems
in nursing babies. Women who are breastfeeding
should check with their physicians about whether to
stop breastfeeding while taking the medicine.
OTHER MEDICAL CONDITIONS. Before using antimigraine drugs, people with any of these medical problems should make sure their physicians know about
their conditions:
 Coronary heart disease
 Angina (crushing chest pain)
 Circulatory problems or blood vessel disease
 High blood pressure
 Liver problems
 Kidney problems
 Any infection
 Eye problems.
USE OF CERTAIN MEDICINES. Taking antimigraine
drugs certain other drugs may affect the way the drugs
work or may increase the chance of side effects.
Side effects
The most common side effects are fluid retention, flushing; high blood pressure; unusually fast
or slow heart rate; numbness; tingling; itching;
nausea; vomiting; weakness; neck or jaw pain and
stiffness; feelings of tightness, heaviness, warmth,
or coldness; sore throat; and discomfort of the
mouth and tongue.
More serious side effects are not common, but
they may occur. If any of the following side effects
occur, call a physician immediately:
 Tightness in the chest
 Bluish tinge to the skin
 Cold arms and legs
 Signs of gangrene, such as coldness, dryness, and a
shriveled or black appearance of a body part
 Dizziness
 Drowsiness
 Shortness of breath or wheezing
 Skin rash
 Swelling of the eyelids or face.
Possible side effects with anticonvulsants include
dizziness, drowsiness, emotional upset, skin rash, temporary hair loss, nausea, and irregular menstrual
periods.
Other side effects may occur with any antimigraine drug. Anyone who has unusual symptoms
after taking this medicine should get in touch with
his or her physician.
Alternative treatments
There are two herbal remedies that are reported to
be effective as alternative treatments for migraine. One
is feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium), an herb related to
the daisy that is traditionally used in England to prevent migraines. Published studies indicate that feverfew can reduce the frequency and intensity of
migraines. It does not, however, relieve pain once the
headache has begun. The other herbal remedy is butterbur root (Petasites hybridus). Petadolex is a natural
preparation made from butterbur root that has been
sold in Germany since the 1970s as a migraine preventive. Petadolex has been available in the United States
since December 1998.
Interactions
Antimigraine drugs may interact with other medicines. When this happens, the effects of one or both of
the drugs may change, or the risk of side effects may be
greater. Anyone who takes these drugs should let the
physician know all other medicines he or she is taking.
Among the drugs that may interact with antimigraine
drugs are:
 Beta blockers such as atenolol (Tenormin) and propranolol (Inderal)
 Drugs that tighten blood vessels such as epinephrine
(EpiPen) and pseudoephedrine (Sudafed)
 Nicotine such as cigarettes or Nicoderm, Habitrol,
and other smoking-cessation drugs
 Certain antibiotics, such as erythromycin and clarithromycin (Biaxin)
 Monoamine oxidase inhibitors such as phenelzine
(Nardil) and tranylcypromine (Parnate)
 Certain antidepressants, such as sertraline (Zoloft),
fluoxetine (Prozac), and paroxetine (Paxil)
 Fluvoxamine (Luvox), prescribed for obsessive compulsive disorder or chronic pain.
Anticonvulsants should not be taken together
with aspirin, alcohol, or tranquilizers.
Remember naratriptan, sumatriptan, rizatriptan
and zolmitriptan may interact with ergotamine. These
drugs should not be taken within 24 hours of taking
any drug containing ergotamine