Definition
Anti-rejection drugs are daily medications taken by
organ transplant patients to prevent organ rejection.
Purpose
Anti-rejection drugs, which are also called immunosuppressants, help to suppress the immune system’s
response to a new organ. When a new organ is placed
inside a patient s body, the patient’s immune system
recognizes the organ as foreign tissue and tries to reject it.
Description
When a physician prescribes anti-rejection drugs,
the patient’s risk of rejection and susceptibility to side
effects are considered. The most common drugs prescribed to prevent organ rejection are cyclosporine,
prednisone, azathioprine, tacrolimus or FK506,
mycophenolate mofetil, sirolimus, and OKT3, as well
as ATGAM and Thymoglobulin. As is true with all
medications, each of these drugs has benefits and
drawbacks. Cyclosporine, which is one of the most
frequently used anti-rejection drugs, is usually combined with prednisone. An extremely powerful medicine, cyclosporine is usually taken by a patient over the
course of his or her lifetime. Cortisol, which is the
naturally produced form of prednisone in a person’s
body, helps the body manage stress, such as infections
or organ rejection. Taking prednisone results in less
cortisol production in a person’s body, thus minimizing
the risk of rejection. Azathioprine, which needs to be
taken with food to avoid stomach upset, is frequently
combined with cyclosporine, prednisone, or tacrolimus.
Mycophenolate mofetil is a relatively new immunosuppressant that is similar to azathioprine; therefore, the
two drugs should not be taken together. It is preferable
to take mycophenolate mofetil on an empty stomach;
however, like azathioprine, it can be taken with food
because it, too, can cause stomach problems, such as
heartburn and nausea. Like azathioprine, mycophenolate mofetil is not a stand-alone drug; instead, it must be
used, in combination with other medications. This is
also the case with regard to sirolimus.
Physicians prescribe either mycophenolate mofetil
or azathioprine (in combination with other immunosuppressant drugs) to help patients cope with acute
bouts of organ rejection. The medications work by
interfering with the multiplication process of white
blood cells, which is part of the body’s natural defense
system when foreign invaders, such as a new organ, are
detected. However, researchers at Duke University
and the University of Florida found that mycophenolate mofetil doesn’t work any better than azathioprine,
but costs significantly more. Aside from cost, another
consideration also needs to be the type of organ transplanted, because acute rejection rates differ. For
example, six months after surgery, approximately
15% of kidney recipients will have an acute rejection
episode as compared to approximately 60% of lung
recipients. And because study results vary depending
on the organ transplanted, more research is needed
with regard to the success of mycophenolate mofetil as
compared to azathioprine.
OKT3 prevents is prescribed to prevent organ rejection immediately after surgery and is also used to treat
acute rejection episodes; ATGAM and Thymoglobulin,
which are similar to OKT3, are used for the same reasons. All three drugs are given intravenously.
Tacrolimus, which is also known as FK506, is a
fairly new drug that is considered by many experts to
be as effective as cyclosporine. An alternative drug
choice for patients that cannot tolerate cyclosporine,
tacrolimus has been the subject of much research in
recent years. Used to treat rejection episodes that are
acute or chronic in nature, tacrolimus is being studied
to see if using it will allow patients to reduce their
dosage of prednisone without organ rejection.
In a presentation at the 2003 American
Transplant Congress, surgeons from the University
of Pittsburgh reported that an innovative clinical protocol developed by Dr. Thomas E. Starzl was implemented, which reduced the dosage of tacrolimus
needed by lung transplant patients with excellent success. Patients required lower doses of prednisone as
well. In fact, in some cases, patients were taking tacrolimus only once a day (rather than twice a day) or only
four times a week. Over the long-term, physicians
hope that there will be less risk of lung recipients
developing the kinds of complications normally associated with high levels of immunosuppressants, such
as kidney dysfunction, which is a common problem
faced by lung transplant patients.
Dr. Thomas E. Strazl, the renowned physician
often referred to as the modern-day father of transplantation, developed the protocol based on the knowledge
that some of his patients had stopped taking their daily
pills with no ill effects. Starzl theorized that giving several drugs to a patient immediately after surgery, which
was the normal practice, might inhibit the immune system from developing a tolerance for the new organ.
Therefore, his new protocol embraced a different
approach. Shortly before the transplantation, patients
were given a drug that killed their T-cells and after the
operation, patients received only one anti-rejection
medicine rather than the multi-pill cocktail normally
prescribed. In an article published by Lancet in 2003,
Starzl and colleagues reported the results of their pilot
study involving 82 two kidney, liver, pancreas or small
bowel transplant patients treated according to the new
drug protocol. Out of the 72 patients with successful
transplants after one year, over half the patients were
taking anti-rejection medication either every other day,
three times per week or twice per week. Amazingly, 11 of
the patients were taking only one pill a week and they
exhibited no signs of organ rejection or complications.
Certainly more research needs to be conducted, but
these results are very promising.
Recommended dosage
The dosages vary depending on the drug or drug
combination being taken by the patient. In general,
cyclosporine is taken every 12 hours in liquid or capsule
form. Tacrolimus is generally taken every 12 hours as
well. The level of either drug in a patient’s blood is
monitored carefully and doses are adjusted accordingly
in order to not only prevent reject, but also unpleasant
side effects. Azathioprine is taken once a day in tablet
form, whereas mycophenolate mofetil is generally taken
every 12 hours. High doses of prednisone are usually
given at first and then tapered down slowly.
Precautions
Patients should discuss proper storage methods
with regard to their medications. Sirolimus, for example, should be stored at room temperature with special
care taken to keep it out of excessive heat and humidity.
Although pregnant women taking anti-rejection
drugs have delivered healthy babies, women planning
on becoming pregnant while taking anti-rejection
drugs should talk with their physicians regarding any
possible complications. For example, the safety of
taking mycophenolate mofetil during pregnancy or
while breastfeeding is questionable and not advised.
Side effects
Side effects vary depending on the individual and
the drug therapy chosen. Patients should talk with
their doctors regarding the various side effects they
can expect and under what conditions emergency
medical care needs to be sought.
Interactions
It is essential that patients talk with their pharmacist and transplant team before taking any medications,
regardless of whether they are prescription or over-thecounter drugs to ensure that the combinations will
not interact. For example, antacids can diminish the
effectiveness of mycophenolate mofetil and drugs used
to treat high cholesterol may increase the potency of
sirolimus. In addition, certain food products can also
alter the potency of some anti-rejection drugs. For
example, grapefruit and grapefruit juice can cause
cyclosporine blood levels to increase.