Definition
Antidiabetic drugs are medicines that help control
blood sugar levels in people with diabetes mellitus
(sugar diabetes).
Purpose
Diabetes may be divided into type I and type II,
formerly termed juvenile onset or insulin-dependent,
and maturity onset or non insulin-dependent. Type I is
caused by a deficiency of insulin production, while
type II is characterized by insulin resistance.
Treatment of type I diabetes is limited to insulin
replacement, while type II diabetes is treatable by a
number of therapeutic approaches. Many cases of insulin resistance are asymptomatic due to normal increases
in insulin secretion, and others may be controlled by
diet and exercise. Drug therapy may be directed toward
increasing insulin secretion, increasing insulin sensitivity, or increasing insulin penetration of the cells.
Description
Antidiabetic drugs may be subdivided into six
groups: insulin, sufonylureas, alpha-glucosidase inhibitors, biguanides, meglitinides, and thiazolidinediones.
Insulin (Humulin, Novolin) is the hormone responsible for glucose utilization. It is effective in both types
of diabetes, since, even in insulin resistance, some sensitivity remains and the condition can be treated with
larger doses of insulin. Most insulins are now produced
by recombinant DNA techniques, and are chemically
identical to natural human insulin. Isophane insulin
suspension, insulin zinc suspension, and other formulations are intended to extend the duration of insulin
action, and permit glucose control over longer periods
of time. In 2003, research suggested that inhaled forms
of insulin offered advantages to injected types, but
further study was needed on its long-term effects on
the lungs and cost-effectiveness.
Sulfonylureas (chlorpropamide [Diabinese], tolazamide [Tolinase], glipizide [Glucotrol] and others) act
by increasing insulin release from the beta cells of the
pancrease. Glimepiride (Amaryl), a member of this
class, appears to have a useful secondary action in
increasing insulin sensitivity in peripheral cells.
Alpha-glucosidase inhibitors (acarbose [Precose],
miglitol [Glyset]) do not enhance insulin secretion.
Rather, they inhibit the conversion of disaccharides and
complex carbohydrates to glucose. This mechanism does
not prevent conversion, but only delays it, reducing the
peak blood glucose levels. Alpha-glucosidase inhibitors
are useful for either monotherapy or in combination
therapy with sulfonylureas or other hypoglycemic agents.
Metformin (Glucophage) is the only available member of the biguanide class. Metformin decreases hepatic
(liver) glucose production, decreases intestinal absorption of glucose and increases peripheral glucose uptake
and use. Metformin may be used as monotherapy
(alone), or in combination therapy with a sulfonylurea.
There are two members of the meglitinide class:
repaglinide (Prandin) and nateglitinide (Starlix). The
mechanism of action of the meglitinides is to stimulate
insulin production. This activity is both dose dependent
and dependent on the presence of glucose, so that the
drugs have reduced effectiveness in the presence of low
blood glucose levels. The meglitinides may be used alone,
or in combination with metformin. The manufacturer
warns that nateglitinide should not be used in combination with other drugs that enhance insulin secretion.
Rosiglitazone (Avandia) and pioglitazone (Actos)
are members of the thiazolidinedione class. They act
by both reducing glucose production in the liver, and
increasing insulin dependent glucose uptake in muscle
cells. They do not increase insulin production. These
drugs may be used in combination with metformin or
a sulfonylurea.
Recommended dosage
Dosage must be highly individualized for all antidiabetic agents and is based on blood glucose levels
which must be taken regularly. Patients should review
specific literature that comes with antidiabetic medications for complete dosage information.
Precautions
Insulin. The greatest short term risk of insulin is
hypoglycemia, which may be the result of either a
direct overdose or an imbalance between insulin injection and level of exercise and diet. This also may occur
in the presence of other conditions which reduce the
glucose load, such as illness with vomiting and diarrhea. Treatment is with glucose in the form of glucose
tablets or liquid, although severe cases may require
intravenous therapy. Allergic reactions and skin reactions also may occur. Insulin is classified as category B
in pregnancy, and is considered the drug of choice for
glucose control during pregnancy. Insulin glargine
(Lantus), an insulin analog which is suitable for
once-daily dosing, is classified as category C, because
there have been reported changes in the hearts of newborns in animal studies of this drug. The reports are
essentially anecdotal, and no cause and effect relationship has been determined. Insulin is not recommended
during breast feeding because either low or high
doses of insulin may inhibit milk production. Insulin
administered orally is destroyed in the GI tract, and
represents no risk to the newborn.
Sulonylureas. All sulfonylurea drugs may cause
hypoglycemia. Most patients become resistant to these
drugs over time, and may require either dose adjustments or a switch to insulin. The list of adverse reactions
is extensive, and includes central nervous system problems and skin reactions, among others. Hematologic
reactions, although rare, may be severe and include
aplastic anemia and hemolytic anemia. The administration of oral hypoglycemic drugs has been associated
with increased cardiovascular mortality as compared
with treatment with diet alone or diet plus insulin. The
sulfonylureas are classified as category C during pregnancy, based on animal studies, although glyburide has
not shown any harm to the fetus and is classified as
category B. Because there may be significant alterations
in blood glucose levels during pregnancy, it is recommended that patients be switched to insulin. These drugs
have not been fully studied during breast feeding, but it
is recommended that because their presence in breast
milk might cause hypoglycemia in the newborn, breast
feeding be avoided while taking sulfonylureas.
Alpha-glucosidase inhibitors are generally well
tolerated, and do not cause hypoglycemia. The most
common adverse effects are gastrointestinal problems,
including flatulence, diarrhea, and abdominal pain.
These drugs are classified as category B in pregnancy.
Although there is no evidence that the drugs are harmful to the fetus, it is important that rigid blood glucose
control be maintained during pregnancy, and pregnant women should be switched to insulin. Alphaglucosidase inhibitors may be excreted in small
amounts in breast milk, and it is recommended that
the drugs not be administered to nursing mothers.
Metformin causes gastrointestinal (stomach and
digestive) reactions in about a third of patients. A rare,
but very serious, reaction to metformin is lactic acidosis, which is fatal in about 50% of cases. Lactic acidosis occurs in patients with multiple medical problems,
including renal (kidney-related) insufficiency. The risk
may be reduced with careful renal monitoring, and
careful dose adjustments to metformin. Metformin is
category B during pregnancy. There have been no
carefully controlled studies of the drug during pregnancy, but there is no evidence of fetal harm from
animal studies. It is important that rigid blood glucose
control be maintained during pregnancy, and pregnant women should be switched to insulin. Animal
studies show that metformin is excreted in milk. It is
recommended that metformin not be administered to
nursing mothers.
Meglitinides. These drugs are generally well tolerated, with an adverse event profile similar to placebo. The drugs are classified as category C during
pregnancy, based on fetal abnormalities in rabbits
given about 40 times the normal human dose. It is
important that rigid blood glucose control be maintained during pregnancy, and pregnant women
should be switched to insulin. It is not known
whether the meglitinides are excreted in human
milk, but it is recommended that these drugs not be
given to nursing mothers.
Thiazolidinediones. These drugs were generally
well tolerated in early trials, but they are structurally
related to an earlier drug, troglitazone, which was
associated with liver function problems. However, in
2003, researchers reported that these drugs, which are
used by more than 6 million Americans, may lead to
serious side effects. Research showed that after one to
16 months of therapy with pioglitazone or rosiglitazone, some patients developed serious edema and signs
of congestive heart failure. Additional studies were
underway in late 2003 to determine how these drugs
caused fluid build-up and if the symptoms occurred
more frequently in certain age groups. The mean age
of patients in the 2003 study was 69 years.
It is strongly recommended that all patients treated
with pioglitazone or rosiglitazone have regular liver
function monitoring. The drugs are classified as pregnancy category C, based on evidence of inhibition of
fetal growth in rats given more than four times the
normal human dose. It is important that rigid blood
glucose control be maintained during pregnancy, and
pregnant women should be switched to insulin. It is not
known whether the thiazolidinediones are excreted in
human milk, however they have been identified in the
milk of lactating rats. It is recommended that these
drugs not be administered to nursing mothers.
Interactions
The sulfonylureas have a particularly long list of
drug interactions, several of which may be severe.
Patients should review specific literature for these drugs.
The actions of oral hypoglycemic agents may be
strengthened by highly protein bound drugs, including
NSAIDs, salicylates, sulfonamides, chloramphenicol,
coumarins, probenecid, MAOIs, and beta blockers.
The literature that accompanies each medication
should list possible drug-drug or food-drug interactions.