Definition
Antiparkinson drugs are medicines that relieve the
symptoms of Parkinson’s disease and other forms of
parkinsonism.
Purpose
Antiparkinson drugs are used to treat symptoms of
parkinsonism, a group of disorders that share four
main symptoms: tremor or trembling in the hands,
arms, legs, jaw, and face; stiffness or rigidity of the
arms, legs, and trunk; slowness of movement (bradykinesia); and poor balance and coordination. Parkinson’s
disease is the most common form of parkinsonism and
is seen more frequently with advancing age. Other
forms of the disorder may result from viral infections,
environmental toxins, carbon monoxide poisoning, and
the effects of treatment with antipsychotic drugs.
The immediate cause of Parkinson’s disease or
Parkinsonian-like syndrome is the lack of the neurotransmitter dopamine in the brain. Drug therapy may
take several forms, including replacement of dopamine, inhibition of dopamine metabolism to increase
the effects of the dopamine already present, or sensitization of dopamine receptors. Drugs may be used
singly or in combination.
Description
Levodopa (Larodopa) is the mainstay of
Parkinson’s treatment. The drug crosses the bloodbrain barrier, and is converted to dopamine. The drug
may be administered alone, or in combination with
carbidopa (Lodosyn) which inhibits the enzyme responsible for the destruction of levodopa. The limitation of
levodopa or levodopa-carbidopa therapy is that after
approximately two years of treatment, the drugs cease
to work reliably. This has been termed the ‘‘on-off phenomenon.’’ Additional treatment strategies have been
developed to retard the progression of Parkinsonism,
or to find alternative approaches to treatment.
Anticholinergic drugs reduce some of the symptoms of Parkinsonism, and reduce the reuptake of
dopamine, thereby sustaining the activity of the natural neurohormone. They may be effective in all stages
of the disease. All drugs with anticholinergic
properties, the naturally occurring belladonna alkaloids (atropine, scopolamine, hyoscyamine), some
antihistamines with anticholinergic properties, and
synthetics such as benztropin (Cogentin), procyclidine
(Kemadrin) and biperiden (Akineton) are members of
this group.Although the anticholinergic drugs have only
limited activity against Parkinson’s disease, they are
useful in the early stages, and may be adjuncts to levodopa as the disease progresses.
Amantadine (Symmetrel), was developed for prevention of influenza virus infection, but has antiParkinsonian properties. Its mechanism of action is
not known.
Bromocriptine (Parlodel) is a prolactin inhibitor,
which is used for a variety of indications including
amenorrhea/galactorrhea, female infertility, and acromegaly. It appears to work by direct stimulation of the
dopamine receptors. Bromocriptine is used as a late
adjunct to levodopa therapy, and may permit reduction in levodopa dosage. Pergolide (Permax) is similar
to bromocriptine, but has not been studied as extensively in Parkinson’s disease.
Entacapone (Comtan) appears to act by maintaining levels of dopamine through enzyme inhibition. It is used as an adjunct to levodopa was the
patient is beginning to experience the on-off effect.
Tolcapone (Tasmar) is a similar agent, but has
demonstrated the potential for inducing severe
liver failure. As such, tolcapone is reserved for
cases where all other adjunctive therapies have
failed or are contraindicated.
Selegeline (Carbex, Eldepryl) is a selective monoamine oxidase B (MAO-B) inhibitor, however its
mechanism of action in Parkinsonism is unclear,
since other drugs with MAO-B inhibition have failed
to show similar anti-Parkinsonian effects. Selegeline is
used primarily as an adjunct to levodopa, although
some studies have indicated that the drug may be
useful in the early stages of Parkinsonism, and may
delay the progression of the disease.
Pramipexole (Mirapex) and ropinirole (Requip)
are believed to act by direct stimulation of the dopamine receptors in the brain. They may be used alone in
early Parkison’s disease, or as adjuncts to levodopa in
advanced stages.
Recommended dosage
Dosages of anti-Parkinsonian medications must
be highly individualized. All doses must be carefully
titrated. Consult specific references.
Precautions
There are a large number of drugs and drug
classes used to treat Parkinson’s disease, and individual references should be consulted.
The anticholinergics have a large number of
adverse effects, all related to their primary mode of
activity. Their cardiovascular effects include tachycardia, palpitations, hypotension, postural hypotension,
and mild bradycardia. They may also cause a wide
range of central nervous system effects, including
disorientation, confusion, memory loss, hallucinations,
psychoses, agitation, nervousness, delusions, delirium,
paranoia, euphoria, excitement, lightheadedness,
dizziness, headache, listlessness, depression, drowsiness,
weakness, and giddiness. Dry mouth, dry eyes and
gastrointestinal distress are common problems.
Sedation has been reported with some drugs in this
group, but this may be beneficial in patients who suffer
from insomnia. Pregnancy risk factor is C. Because
anticholinergic drugs may inhibit milk production,
their use during breastfeeding is not recommended.
Patients should be warned that anticholinergic medications will inhibit perspiration, and so exercise during
periods of high temperature should be avoided.
Levodopa has a large number of adverse effects.
Anorexia, loss of appetite, occurs in roughly half the
patients using this drug. Symptoms of gastrointestinal
upset, such as nausea and vomiting, have been reported
in 80% of cases. Other reported effects include
increased hand tremor; headache; dizziness; numbness;
weakness and faintness; bruxism; confusion; insomnia; nightmares; hallucinations and delusions; agitation and anxiety; malaise; fatigue and euphoria.
Levodopa has not been listed under the pregnancy
risk factor schedules, but should be used with caution.
Breastfeeding is not recommended.
Amantadine is generally well tolerated, but may
cause dizziness and nausea. It is classified as pregnancy
schedule C. Since amantadine is excreted in breast
milk, breastfeeding while taking amantidine is not
recommended.
Pergolide and bromocriptine have been generally
well tolerated. Orthostatic hypotension are common
problems, and patients must be instructed to risk
slowly from bed. This problem can be minimized by
low initial doses with small dose increments.
Hallucinations may be a problem. Bromocriptine has
not been evaluated for pregnancy risk, while pergolide
is category B. Since both drugs may inhibit lactation,
breastfeeding while taking these drugs is not
recommended.
Pramipexole and ropinirole cause orthostatic
hypotension, hallucinations and dizziness. The two
drugs are in pregnancy category C. In animals, ropinirole has been shown to have adverse effects on
embryo-fetal development, including teratogenic
effects, decreased fetal body weight, increased fetal
death and digital malformation. Because these drugs
inhibit prolactin secretion, they should not be taken
while breastfeeding.
Side effects
The most common side effects are associated with
the central nervous system, and include dizziness,
lightheadedness, mood changes and hallucinations.
Gastrointestinal problems, including nausea and
vomiting, are also common.
Interactions
All anti-Parkinsonian regimens should be carefully reviewed for possible drug interactions. Note
that combination therapy with anti-Parkinsonian
drugs is, in itself, use of additive and potentiating
interactions between drugs, and so careful dose adjustment is needed whenever a drug is added or
withdrawn.