Definition
Antiandrogen drugs are a diverse group of medications given to counteract the effects of androgens
(male sex hormones) on various body organs and
tissues. Some medications in this category work by
lowering the body’s production of androgens while
others work by blocking the body’s ability to make
use of the androgens that are produced. The first
group of antiandrogens includes such medications as
leuprolide (Lupron, Viadur, or Eligard), goserelin
(Zoladex), triptorelin (Trelstar Depot), and abarelix
(Plenaxis). The second group includes flutamide
(Eulexin), nilutamide (Nilandron), cyproterone acetate (Cyprostat, Androcur, Cyproterone), and bicalutamide (Casodex). Flutamide, nilutamide, and
bicalutamide are nonsteroidal antiandrogen drugs
while cyproterone acetate is a steroidal medication.
Some drugs that were originally developed to treat
other conditions are sometimes categorized as antiandrogens because their off-label uses include some of
the disorders listed below. These drugs include
medroxyprogesterone (Depo-Provera), a derivative of
the female sex hormone progesterone that is used as a
contraceptive and treatment for abnormal uterine
bleeding; ketoconazole (Nizoral), an antifungal drug;
and spironolactone (Aldactone), a diuretic.
Purpose
Antiandrogen drugs may be given for any of
several conditions or disorders, ranging from skin
problems to mental disorders:

Prostate cancer. Antiandrogen medications may be
used to treat both early-stage and advanced prostate
cancer by lowering or blocking the supply of male sex
hormones that encourage the growth and spread of
the cancer.

Androgenetic alopecia. Androgenetic alopecia is a
type of hair loss that is genetically determined and
affects both men and women. It is sometimes called
pattern baldness.

Acne. Acne is the end result of several factors, one of
which is excessive production of sebum, a whitish
semiliquid greasy substance produced by certain
glands in the skin. Antiandrogens may help to clear
acne by slowing down the secretion of sebum, which
depends on androgen production.

Amenorrhea. Amenorrhea, or the absence of menstrual periods in females of childbearing age, is sometimes caused by excessively high levels of androgens
in the blood. Antiandrogen medications may help to
restore normal menstrual periods.

Hirsutism. Hirsutism is a condition in which women
develop excessive facial and body hair in a distribution pattern usually associated with adult males.
It results from abnormally high levels of androgens
in the bloodstream or from increased sensitivity of
the hair follicles to normal levels of androgens.
Hirsutism may be a sign of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), a condition in which the ovaries
develop multiple large cysts and produce too
much androgen.

Gender reassignment. Antiandrogen drugs are often
prescribed for male-to-female (MTF) transsexuals as
part of the hormonal treatment that precedes gender
reassignment surgery.

Paraphilias. Paraphilias are a group of mental disorders characterized by intense and recurrent sexual
urges or behaviors involving nonhuman objects, children or nonconsenting adults, or pain and humiliation. Antiandrogen drugs have been prescribed for
men diagnosed with paraphilias in order to lower
blood serum levels of testosterone and help them
control their sexual urges.

Virilization. Virilization is an extreme form of hyperandrogenism in females, marked by such changes
as development of male pattern baldness, voice
changes, and overdevelopment of the skeletal muscles. Antiandrogens may be given to correct this
condition.
Description

Leuprolide. Leuprolide is classified as a luteinizing
hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) agonist,
which means that it resembles a chemical produced
by the hypothalamus (a gland located in the brain)
that lowers the level of testosterone in the bloodstream. It also reduces levels of estrogen in girls
and women, and may be used to treat endometriosis or tumors in the uterus. It is presently
under investigation as a possible treatment for
the paraphilias.

Goserelin. Goserelin is also an LHRH agonist, and
works in the same way as leuprolide.

Triptorelin. Triptorelin is an LHRH agonist, and
works in the same way as leuprolide. It is not usually
given to women, however.

Abarelix. Abarelix is a newer drug that works by
blocking hormone receptors in the pituitary gland.
It is recommended for the treatment of prostate cancer in men with advanced disease who refuse surgery,
cannot take other hormonal treatments, or are poor
candidates for surgery.

Ketoconazole. Ketoconazole is an antifungal drug
available in tablets to be taken by mouth. Its use in
treating hirsutism is off-label.

Flutamide. Flutamide is a nonsteroidal antiandrogen medication that blocks the use of androgen by
the body.

Nilutamide. Nilutamide is another nonsteroidal antiandrogen drug that works by blocking the body’s use
of androgens.

Bicalutamide. Bicalutamide is a nonsteroidal antiandrogen medication that works in the same way as
flutamide.

Cyproterone acetate. Cyproterone acetate is a steroidal antiandrogen drug that works by lowering testosterone production as well as blocking the body’s use
of androgens.

Medroxyprogesterone. Medroxyprogesterone is a
synthetic derivative of progesterone that prevents
ovulation and keeps the lining of the uterus from
breaking down, thus preventing uterine bleeding.

Spironolactone. Spironolactone is a potassiumsparing diuretic that may be given to treat androgen
excess in women.
Recommended dosage

Leuprolide. Leuprolide is available in an injectable
form and as an implant. The implant form, used to
treat prostate cancer, contains 22.5 mg of leuprolide
and is inserted under the skin every three months.
This type of slow-release medication is called depot
form. A longer-acting implant that lasts 12 months
is also available. Injectable leuprolide is injected
once a day in a 1-mg dose to treat prostate cancer.
The dosage for endometriosis or uterine tumors is
3.75 mg injected into a muscle once a month for three
to six months.Goserelin. Goserelin is implanted under the skin of
the upper abdomen. The dosage for treating cancer
of the prostate is one 3.6-mg implant every 28 days
or one 10.8-mg implant every 12 weeks. For treating
endometriosis, the dosage is one 3.6-mg implant
every 28 days for six months.

Triptorelin. Triptorelin is given as a long-lasting
injection for treatment of prostate cancer or
paraphilias. The usual dose for either condition is
3.75 mg, injected into a muscle once a month.

Abarelix. Abarelix is given in 100-mg doses by deep
injection into the muscles of the buttocks. It is given
on days 1, 15, and 29 of treatment, then every four
weeks for a total treatment duration of 12 weeks.

Ketoconazole. For treatment of hirsutism, 400 mg by
mouth once per day.

Flutamide. Flutamide is available in capsule as
well as tablet form. For treatment of prostate cancer,
250 mg by mouth three times a day. For virilization
or hyperandrogenism in women, 250 mg by mouth
three times a day. It should be used in women, however, only when other treatments have proved
ineffective.

Nilutamide. To treat prostate cancer, nilutamide is
taken in a single 300-mg daily dose by mouth for the
first 30 days of therapy, then a single daily dose of
150 mg..

Bicalutamide. Bicalutamide is taken by mouth in a
single daily dose of 50 mg to treat prostate cancer.

Cyproterone acetate. Cyproterone is taken by mouth
three times a day in 100-mg doses to treat prostate
cancer. The dose for treating hyperandrogenism or
virilization in women is one 50-mg tablet by mouth
each day for the first ten days of the menstrual cycle.
Cyproterone acetate given to treat acne is usually
given in the form of an oral contraceptive (Diane-
35) that combines the drug (2 mg) with ethinyl estradiol (35 mg). Diane-35 is also taken as hormonal
therapy by MTF transsexuals. The dose for treating
paraphilias is 200–400 mg by injection in depot form
every 1–2 weeks, or 50–200 mg by mouth daily.

Medroxyprogesterone. For the treatment of paraphilias, given as an intramuscular 150-mg injection
daily, weekly, or monthly, depending on the patient’s
serum testosterone levels, or as an oral dose of 100–
400 mg daily. As hormonal therapy for MTF transsexuals, 10–40 mg per day. For polycystic ovary
syndrome, 10 mg daily for 10 days.

Spironolactone. For hyperandrogenism in women,
100–200 mg per day by mouth; for polycystic ovary
syndrome, 50–200 mg per day. For the treatment of
acne, 200 mg per day. For hormonal therapy for
MTF transsexuals, 200–400 mg per day. A topical
form of spironolactone is available for the treatment
of androgenetic alopecia.
Precautions

Leuprolide. Leuprolide should not be used by pregnant or nursing women, by patients diagnosed with
spinal compression, or by patients allergic to the
drug. Women taking leuprolide should not try to
become pregnant, and should use methods of birth
control that do not contain hormones.

Goserelin. Goserelin should not be used during pregnancy orlactation, or by patients known to be allergic
to it. As with leuprolide, women taking goserelin
should use methods of contraception that do not
contain hormones.

Triptorelin. Patients using triptorelin should see their
doctor at regular intervals for monitoring of side
effects.

Abarelix. Abarelix should not be given to children or
women. Because of the severity of this drug’s possible
side effects, doctors who prescribe it for men must be
certified following successful completion of a safety
program for its proper use.

Ketoconazole. Ketoconazole should not be given
to alcoholic patients or those allergic to the drug. In
addition, patients using ketoconazole should have
their liver function monitored by their doctor.

Flutamide. Flutamide should not be used by pregnant women. Patients taking flutamide should have
their liver function monitored carefully. They should
notify their doctor at once if they have pain in the
upper right side of the abdomen or a yellowish discoloration of the eyes and skin, as these are signs of
liver damage. In addition, patients using this drug
should not discontinue taking it without telling their
doctor.

Nilutamide. This drug should not be given to
patients who are allergic to it, have severe respiratory
problems, or have been diagnosed with a liver disorder. Patients taking this drug should discontinue
using alcoholic beverages while they are being treated with it.

Bicalutamide. The precautions while using this drug
are the same as those for flutamide.

Cyproterone acetate. This drug has not been
approved by the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) for use in the United States, but is approved
for use in Canada and the United Kingdom. It
should not be used during pregnancy or lactation, or
by patients with liver disease. Men who are taking
this drug for treatment of paraphilias should not use
alcohol.

Medroxyprogesterone. This drug should not be
given to patients with a history of blood clot formation in their blood vessels. It should be used with
caution in patients with asthma, seizure disorders,
migraine headaches, liver or kidney disorders, or
heart disease.

Spironolactone. This drug should not be given to
patients with overly high levels of potassium in
the blood or to patients with liver disease or kidney
failure. It should also not be given to pregnant or
lactating women.
Side effects

Leuprolide. Side effects of leuprolide in men may
include pains in the chest, groin, or legs; hot flashes,
loss of interest in sex, or impotence; bone pain; sleep
disturbances; and mood changes. Side effects in
women may include amenorrhea or light and irregular menstrual periods; loss of bone density; mood
changes; burning or itching sensations in the vagina;
or pelvic pain.

Goserelin. The side effects of goserelin may include
nausea and vomiting; they are otherwise the same as
for leuprolide.

Triptorelin. Side effects of triptorelin include pain in
the bladder, difficulty urinating, or bloody or cloudy
urine; pain in the side or lower back; hot flashes or
headache; loss of interest in sex or impotence; vomiting or diarrhea; unusual bleeding or bruising; pain at
the injection site; unusual tiredness or sleep disturbances; depression or rapid mood changes. It may
also cause a temporary enlargement of the tumor;
this side effect is known as tumor flare.

Abarelix. This drug may cause immediate life-threatening allergic reactions following any dose. May
also cause a loss of bone mineral density, irregular
heartbeat, hot flashes, sleep disturbances, gynecomastia, or pain in the breasts and nipples.

Ketoconazole. The side effects of ketoconazole
include nausea and vomiting, loss of appetite,
abdominal pain, skin rash or itching, uterine bleeding, breast pain, gynecomastia, hair loss, loss of
interest in sex, and decline in sperm production.

Flutamide. Flutamide has been reported to cause
breast tenderness and gynecomastia in men as well
as fatigue, nausea, flu-like symptoms, and runny
nose; darkened urine; indigestion, constipation,
diarrhea, or gas; bluish-colored or dry skin; dizziness;
and liver damage. These side effects may be intensified in patients who smoke.

Nilutamide. The side effects of nilutamide are the
same as those for flutamide. In addition, this drug
may affect the ability of the eyes to adjust to sudden
changes in light intensity or may make the eyes unusually sensitive to light. Another potential side effect
is difficulty breathing; this is more likely to occur in
Asian patients taking this drug than in Caucasians.

Bicalutamide. The side effects of this drug are the
same as those for flutamide.

Cyproterone acetate. Cyproterone has been reported
to cause gynecomastia, impotence, loss of interest in
sex, deep venous thrombosis, and possible damage to
the cardiovascular system.

Medroxyprogesterone. The side effects of this drug
include high blood pressure, headache, nausea and
vomiting, changes in menstrual flow, breakthrough
bleeding, puffy skin (edema), weight gain, and sore or
swollen breasts.

Spironolactone. Spironolactone may cause fatigue,
headache, and drowsiness; gynecomastia and impotence in men; abdominal cramps, nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, or loss of appetite; and skin rashes or
itching.
Interactions

Leuprolide. No interactions with other medications
have been reported.

Goserelin. No interactions have been reported.

Triptorelin. No interactions have been reported.

Abarelix. Abarelix may interact with other medications that affect heart rhythm, including procainamide, amiodarone, sotalol, and dofetilde.

Ketoconazole. Ketoconazole interacts with a number
of drugs, including rifampin, warfarin, phenytoin,
antacids, cyclosporine, terfenadine, and astemizole.
It may cause a sunburn-like skin reaction if used
together with alcohol.

Flutamide. This drug has been reported to intensify
the effects of warfarin (Coumadin) and other bloodthinning medications. It has also been reported to
intensify the effects of phenytoin (Dilantin), a drug
given to control seizures.

Nilutamide. Reported interactions are the same as for
flutamide; in addition, nilutamide has been reported
to intensify the effects of theophylline (Theo-Dur), a
drug given to treat asthma.
Bicalutamide. Reported interactions are the same as
for flutamide.

Cyproterone acetate. Patients taking oral medications to control diabetes may require dosage adjustments while taking this drug.

Medroxyprogesterone. Patients taking phenobarbital, phenothiazine tranquilizers (chlorpromazine,
perphenazine, fluphenazine, etc.), or oral medications to control diabetes should consult their doctor
about dosage adjustments.

Spironolactone. Spironolactone is reported to
decrease the effectiveness of aspirin and anticoagulants (blood thinners). It may also interact with potassium supplements to increase the patient’s blood
potassium level.