Definition
Antihypertensive drugs are medicines that help
lower blood pressure.
Purpose
The overall class of antihypertensive agents lowers
blood pressure, although the mechanisms of action vary
greatly. In 2003, a Joint National Committee on
Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of
High Blood Pressure report said that recent clinical trials
show that antihypertensive treatment can reduce incidence of stroke by 35-40%, heart attack by 20-25%,
and onset of new heart failure by 50%. Within this therapeutic class, there are several subgroups of drugs. There
are a large number of drugs used to control hypertension,
and the drugs listed below are representative, but not the
only members of their classes.
The calcium channel blocking agents, also called
slow channel blockers or calcium antagonists, inhibit
the movement of ionic calcium across the cell membrane.
This reduces the force of contraction of muscles of the
heart and arteries. Although the calcium channel blockers
are treated as a group, there are four different chemical
classes, leading to significant variations in the activity of
individual drugs. Nifedipine (Adalat, Procardia) has the
greatest effect on the blood vessels, while verapamil
(Calan, Isoptin) and diltiazem (Cardizem) have a greater
effect on the heart muscle itself.
Peripheral vasodilators such as hydralazine
(Apresoline), isoxuprine (Vasodilan), and minoxidil
(Loniten) act by relaxing blood vessels.
There are several groups of drugs that act by
reducing adrenergic nerve stimulation, the excitatory
nerve stimulation that causes contraction of the muscles in the arteries, veins, and heart. These drugs
include the beta-adrenergic blockers and alpha/beta
adrenergic blockers. There are also non-specific adrenergic blocking agents.
Beta-adrenergic blocking agents include propranolol (Inderal), atenolol (Tenormin), and pindolol
(Visken). Propranolol acts on the beta-adrenergic
receptors anywhere in the body, and has been used as
a treatment for emotional anxiety and rapid heart
beat. Atenolol and acebutolol (Sectral) act specifically
on the nerves of the heart and circulation.
There are two alpha/beta adrenergic blockers,
labetolol (Normodyne, Trandate) and carvedilol
(Coreg). These work similarly to the beta blockers.
The ACE II inhibitors, losartan (Cozaar), candesartan (Atacand), irbesartan (Avapro), telmisartan
(Micardis), valsartan (Diovan) and eprosartan
(Teveten) directly inhibit the effects of ACE II rather
than blocking its production. Their actions are similar
to the ACE inhibitors, but they appear to have a more
favorable side effect and safety profile.
In addition to these drugs, other classes of drugs
have been used to lower blood pressure, most
notably the thiazide diuretics. There are 12 thiazide
diuretics marketed in the United States, including
hydrochlorothiazide (Hydrodiuril, Esidrex), indapamide (Lozol), polythiazide (Renese), and hydroflumethiazide (Diucardin). The drugs in this class
appear to lower blood pressure through several
mechanisms. By promoting sodium loss they lower
blood volume. At the same time, the pressure of the
walls of blood vessels, the peripheral vascular resistance, is lowered. Thiazide diuretics are commonly
used as the first choice for reduction of mild hypertension, and may be used in combination with other
antihypertensive drugs.
Debate continued in 2003 as to the best drugs to
lower blood pressure. One study seemed to prove
that diuretics were the best initial choice, but a
study from Australia said that ACE inhibitors
were a superior choice. However, many physicians
agreed that the best treatment for a particular
patient depends on his or her particular age, economic situation, genetic factors and other existing
illnesses and conditions.
While designed to lower cholesterol rather than
blood pressure, a large clinical trial reported in 2003
that people with high blood pressure may one day
benefit from taking them. In the trial, participants
with increased risk for heart disease, even if it was not
from high cholesterol, benefited from taking statins.
Recommended dosage
Recommended dosage varies with patient, drug,
severity of hypertension, and whether the drug is being
used alone or in combination with other drugs.
Specialized references can be consulted for further
information.
Precautions
Because of the large number of classes and individual drugs in this group, specialized references offer
more complete information.
Peripheral vasodilators may cause dizziness and
orthostatic hypotension—a rapid lowering of blood
pressure when the patient stands up in the morning.
Patients taking these drugs must be instructed to rise
from bed slowly. Pregnancy risk factors for this group
are generally category C. Hydralazine has been shown to
cause cleft palate in animal studies, but there is no human
data available. Breastfeeding is not recommended.
ACE inhibitors generally are well tolerated, but
rarely may cause dangerous reactions including laryngospasm and angioedema. Persistent cough is a
common side effect. ACE inhibitors should not be
used in pregnancy. When used in pregnancy during
the second and third trimesters, angiotension-converting inhibitors (ACEIs) can cause injury to and even
death in the developing fetus. When pregnancy is
detected, discontinue the ACE inhibitor as soon as
possible. Breastfeeding is not recommended.
ACE II inhibitors are generally well tolerated and
do not cause cough. Pregnancy risk factor is category C
during the first trimester and category D during the
second and third trimesters. Drugs that act directly on
the renin-angiotensin system can cause fetal and
neonatal morbidity and death when administered to
pregnant women. Several dozen cases have been
reported in patients who were taking ACE inhibitors.
When pregnancy is detected, AIIRAs should be discontinued as soon as possible. Breastfeeding is not
recommended.
Thiazide diuretics commonly cause potassium
depletion. Patients should have potassium supplementation either through diet or potassium supplements.
Pregnancy risk factor is category B (chlorothiazide,
chlorthalidone, hydrochlorothiazide, indapamide,
metolazone) or category C (bendroflumethiazide, benzthiazide, hydroflumethiazide, methyclothiazide, trichlormethiazide). Routine use during
normal pregnancy is inappropriate. Thiazides are
found in breast milk. Breastfeeding is not recommended.
Beta blockers may cause a large number of adverse
reactions including dangerous heart rate abnormalities.
Pregnancy risk factor is category B (acebutolol, pindolol, sotalol) or category C (atenolol, labetalol, esmolol,
metoprolol, nadolol, timolol, propranolol, penbutolol,
carteolol, bisoprolol). Breastfeeding is not recommended. In 2003, a report announced that adavances in
pharmacogenetics mean that in the future, physicians
may be able to use a patients genetic information to
make certain prescribing decisions for antihypertensives.
Interactions
Specific drug references should be consulted, since
interactions vary for antihypertensive drugs.