Definition
Tricyclic antidepressants are medicines that
relieve mental depression.
Purpose
Since their discovery in the 1950s, tricyclic antidepressants have been used to treat mental depression.
Like other antidepressant drugs, they reduce symptoms
such as extreme sadness, hopelessness, and lack of
energy. Some tricyclic antidepressants are also used
to treat bulimia, cocaine withdrawal, panic disorder,
obsessive-compulsive disorders, certain types of
chronic pain, and bed-wetting in children.
Description
Named for their three-ring chemical structure,
tricyclic antidepressants work by correcting chemical
imbalances in the brain. But because they also affect
other chemicals throughout the body, these drugs may
produce many unwanted side effects.
Tricyclic antidepressants are available only with a
physician’s prescription and are sold in tablet, capsule,
liquid, and injectable forms. Some commonly used
tricyclic antidepressants are amitriptyline (Elavil),
desipramine (Norpramin), imipramine (Tofranil),
nortriptyline (Pamelor), and protriptyline (Vivactil).
Different drugs in this family have different effects,
and physicians can choose the drug that best fits the
patient’s symptoms. For example, a physician might
prescribe Elavil for a person with depression who has
trouble sleeping, because this drug is more likely to
make people feel calm and sleepy. Other tricyclic antidepressants might be more appropriate for depressed
people with low energy.
Recommended dosage
The recommended dosage depends on many factors, including the patient’s age, weight, general health
and symptoms. The type of tricyclic antidepressant
and its strength also must be considered. Check with
the physician who prescribed the drug or the pharmacist who filled the prescription for the correct dosage.
Always take tricyclic antidepressants exactly as
directed. Never take larger or more frequent doses,
and do not take the drug for longer than directed.
Do not stop taking the medicine just because it does
not seem to be working. Several weeks may be needed
for its effects to be felt. Visit the physician as often as
recommended so that the physician can check to see if
the drug is working and to note for side effects.
Do not stop taking this medicine suddenly after
taking it for several weeks or more. Gradually tapering the dose may be necessary to reduce the chance of
withdrawal symptoms.
Taking this medicine with food may prevent upset
stomach.
Precautions
The effects of this medicine may continue for three
to seven days after patients stop taking it. All precautions should be observed during this period, as well as
throughout treatment with tricyclic antidepressants.
Some people feel drowsy, dizzy, or lightheaded,
when taking these drugs. The drugs may also cause
blurred vision. Anyone who takes these drugs should
not drive, use machines or do anything else that might
be dangerous until they have found out how the drugs
affect them.
Because tricyclic antidepressants work on the central nervous system, they may add to the effects of
alcohol and other drugs that cause drowsiness, such
as antihistamines, cold medicine, allergy medicine,
sleep aids, medicine for seizures, tranquilizers, some
pain relievers, and muscle relaxants. Anyone taking
tricyclic antidepressants should check with his or her
physician before drinking alcohol or taking any drugs
that cause drowsiness.
These medicines make some people feel lightheaded, dizzy, or faint when they get up after sitting
or lying down. To lessen the problem, get up gradually
and hold onto something for support if possible.
Tricyclic antidepressants may interact with medicines used during surgery, dental procedures, or emergency treatment. These interactions could increase the
chance of side effects. Anyone who is taking tricyclic
antidepressants should be sure to tell the health care
professional in charge before having any surgical or
dental procedures or receiving emergency treatment.
These drugs may also change the results of medical tests. Before having medical tests, anyone taking
this medicine should alert the health care professional
in charge.
This medicine may increase sensitivity to sunlight.
Even brief exposure to sun can cause a severe sunburn or
a rash. While being treated with this tricyclic antidepressants, avoid being in direct sunlight, especially
between 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.; wear a hat and tightly
woven clothing that covers the arms and legs; use a
sunscreen with a skin protection factor (SPF) of at
least 15; protect the lips with a sun block lipstick; and
do not use tanning beds, tanning booths, or sunlamps.
Tricyclic antidepressants may cause dry mouth. To
temporarily relieve the discomfort, chew sugarless
gum, suck on sugarless candy or ice chips, or use saliva
substitutes, which come in liquid and tablet forms and
are available without a prescription.
Children and older people are especially sensitive to
the effects of tricyclic antidepressants. This increased
sensitivity may increase the chance of side effects.
Special conditions
People with certain medical conditions or who are
taking certain other medicines can have problems if
they take tricyclic antidepressants. Before taking these
drugs, be sure to let the physician know about any of
these conditions:
 ALLERGIES. Anyone who has had unusual reactions to tricyclic antidepressants or to carbamazepine
(Tegretol), maprotiline (Ludiomil), or trazodone
(Desyrel) in the past should let his or her physician
know before taking tricyclic antidepressants. The physician should also be told about any allergies to foods,
dyes, preservatives, or other substances.
 PREGNANCY. Problems have been reported in
babies whose mothers took tricyclic antidepressants
just before delivery. Women who are pregnant or who
may become pregnant should check with their physicians about the safety of using tricyclic antidepressants.
 BREASTFEEDING. Tricyclic antidepressants pass
into breast milk and may cause drowsiness in nursing
babies whose mothers take the drugs. Women who are
breastfeeding should check with their physicians
before using tricyclic antidepressants.
 DIABETES. Tricyclic antidepressants may affect
blood sugar levels. Diabetic patients who notice
changes in blood or urine test results while taking
this medicine should check with their physicians.
OTHER MEDICAL CONDITIONS. Before using tricyclic antidepressants, people with any of these medical problems should make sure their physicians are
aware of their conditions:

current or past alcohol or drug abuse

bipolar disorder (manic-depressive illness)

schizophrenia

seizures (convulsions)

heart disease

high blood pressure

kidney disease

liver disease

overactive thyroid

stomach or intestinal problems

enlarged prostate

problems urinating

glaucoma

asthma
USE OF CERTAIN MEDICINES. Taking tricyclic antidepressants with certain other drugs may affect the way
the drugs work or may increase the chance of side effects.
Side effects
The most common side effects are dizziness, drowsiness, dry mouth, unpleasant taste, headache, nausea,
mild tiredness or weakness, increased appetite or craving for sweets, and weight gain. These problems
usually go away as the body adjusts to the drug and
do not require medical treatment. Less common side
effects, such as diarrhea, vomiting, sleep problems,
sweating, and heartburn also may occur and do not
need medical attention unless they do not go away or
they interfere with normal activities.
More serious side effects are not common, but
may occur. If any of the following side effects occur,
check with the physician who prescribed the medicine
as soon as possible:

blurred vision

eye pain

confusion

hallucinations

fainting

loss of balance

swallowing problems

difficulty speaking

mask-like face

shakiness or trembling

nervousness or restlessness

movement problems, such as shuffling walk, stiff
arms and legs, or slow movement

decreased sexual ability

fast or irregular heartbeat

constipation

problems urinating
Some side effects may continue after treatment
with tricyclic antidepressants has ended. Check with
a physician if these symptoms occur:

headache

nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea

sleep problems, including vivid dreams

unusual excitement, restlessness, or irritability
Interactions
Life-threatening reactions, such as extrememly high
blood pressure, may occur when tricyclic antidepressants are taken with other antidepressants called monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors (such as Nardil
and Parnate). Do not take tricyclic antidepressants within
2 weeks of taking a MAO inhibitor. However, a patient
can take an MAO inhibitor immediately after tricyclic
antidepressant therapy is stopped by the physician.
Tricyclic antidepressants may interact with many
other medicines. When this happens, the effects of one
or both of the drugs may change or the risk of side
effects may be greater. Anyone who takes tricyclic
antidepressants should let the physician know all
other medicines he or she is taking. Among the drugs
that may interact with tricyclic antidepressants are:
Central nervous system (CNS) depressants such as
medicine for allergies, colds, hay fever, and asthma;
sedatives; tranquilizers; prescription pain medicine;
muscle relaxants; medicine for seizures; sleep aids;
barbiturates; and anesthetics.

diet pills

amphetamines

blood thinning drugs

medicine for overactive thyroid

cimetidine (Tagamet)

other antidepressant drugs, including MAO inhibitors (such as Nardil and Parnate) and antidepressants that raise serotonin levels (such as Prozac and
Zoloft)

blood pressure medicines such as clonidine (Catapres)
and guanethidine monosulfate (Ismelin)

disulfiram (Antabuse), used to treat alcohol abuse

major tranquilizers such as thioridazine (Mellaril)
and chlorpromazine (Thorazine)

antianxiety drugs such as chlordiazepoxide (Librium)
and alprazolam (Xanax)

antiseizure medicines such as carbamazaepine
(Tegretol) and phenytoin (Dilantin)
The list above does not include every drug that
may interact with tricyclic antidepressants. Be sure to
check with a physician or pharmacist before combining tricyclic antidepressants with any other prescription or nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicine