Definition
Antiretroviral drugs inhibit the reproduction of
retroviruses—viruses composed of RNA rather than
 DNA. The best known of this group is HIV, human
immunodeficiency virus, the causative agent of AIDS.
Purpose
Antiretroviral agents are virustatic agents which
block steps in the replication of the virus. The drugs
are not curative; however continued use of drugs,
particularly in multi-drug regimens, significantly
slows disease progression.
Description
There are three main types of antiretroviral drugs,
although only two steps in the viral replication process
are blocked. Nucleoside analogs, or nucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs), such as didanosine
(ddI, Videx), lamivudine (3TC, Epivir), stavudine
(d4T, Zerit), zalcitabine (ddC, Hivid), and zidovudine
(AZT, Retrovir), act by inhibiting the enzyme reverse
transcriptase. Because a retrovirus is composed of
RNA, the virus must make a DNA strand in order to
replicate itself. Reverse transcriptase is an enzyme that
is essential to making the DNA copy. The nucleoside
reverse transcriptase inhibitors are incorporated into
the DNA strand. This is a faulty DNA molecule that is
incapable of reproducing.
The non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors
(NNRTIs), such as delavirdine (Rescriptor), loviride,
and nevirapine (Viramune) act by binding directly to
the reverse transcriptase molecule, inhibiting its
activity.
A fourth class of drugs was under clinical trials in
 2003. Called fusion inhibitors, they block HIV from
fusing with healthy cells. The first to receive FDA
approval will likely be a drug called Enfurvitide.
Because HIV mutates readily, the virus can
develop resistance to single drug therapy. However,
treatment with drug combinations appears to produce
a durable response. Proper treatment appears to
slow the progression of HIV infections and reduce
the frequency of opportunistic infections. One of the
most notable advances in recent years has been the
success of highly active antiretroviral therapy
(HAART). This multidrug approach reduced the
risk of opportunistic infections in persons with HIV/
AIDS and slowed the progression of the disease and
death. Usually, patients receive triple combination
therapy, however research in 2003 showed a new
once-daily regimen of quadruple therapy effective.
The combination included adefovir, lamivudine,
didanosine, and efavirenz. In short, the scientific community continues to make rapid advancements in
developing and evaluating antiretroviral drug therapy.
It is best to keep well informed and frequently check
with a physician.Recommended dosage
Doses must be individualized based on the patient
and use of interacting drugs. The optimum combinations of antiretroviral drugs have not been determined,
nor is there agreement on the stage of infection at
which to start treatment. In fact, starting treatment
too early has led to unwanted side effects in some
patients or problems with patient readiness to comply.
Treatment should begin when the time and circumstances are right.
Precautions
Although the antiretroviral drugs fall into several
groups, each drug has a unique pattern of adverse
effects and drug interactions. Since the drugs are used
in various combinations, the frequency and severity
of adverse effects will vary with the combination.
Although most drug combinations show a higher
rate of adverse events than single drug therapy,
some patterns are not predictable. For example, indinavir has been reported to cause insomnia in 3% of
patients, however, when used in combination with
zidovudine, only 1.5% of patients complained of
sleep difficulties.
The most severe adverse effects associated with
the protease inhibitors are kidney and liver toxicity.
Patients also have reported a syndrome of abdominal
distention (selling and expansion) and increased body
odor, which may be socially limiting. Hemophilic
patients have reported increased bleeding tendencies
while taking protease inhibitors. The drugs are pregnancy category B. There have been no controlled studies of safety in pregnancy. HIV-infected mothers are
advised not to breast feed in order to prevent transmission of the virus to the newborn.
The nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors
have significant levels of toxicity. Lactic acidosis in
the absence of hypoxemia and severe liver enlargement
with fatty degeneration have been reported with zidovudine and zalcitabine, and are potentially fatal. Rare
cases of liver failure, considered possibly related to
underlying hepatitis B and zalcitabine monotherapy,
have been reported.
Abacavir has been associated with fatal hypersensitivity reactions. Didanosine has been associated
with severe pancreatitis. Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors are pregnancy category C.
There is limited information regarding safety during
pregnancy. Zidovudine has been used during pregnancy to reduce the risk of HIV infection to the
infant. HIV-infected mothers are advised not to
breast feed in order to prevent transmission of the
virus to the newborn.
Efavirenz has been associated with a high frequency of skin rash, 27% in adults and 40% in children. Nevirapine has been associated with severe liver
damage and skin reactions. All of the non-nucleoside
reverse transcriptase inhibitors are pregnancy category C, based on animal studies.
Using antiretroviral drugs in combination also
helps lower risk of developing viral resistance. Fifty
percent of patients who fail antiretroviral therapy areresistant to one class of drug. Recent research into
multiple drugs and combinations is promising.
Interactions
Because of the high frequency of drug interactions
associated with AIDS therapy, specialized references
should be consulted. Use of recreational drugs while
on antriretroviral therapy can trigger potentially lethal
side effects or negate the positive effects of the therapy.
Saquinavir is marketed in both hard and soft
gelatin capsules. Because saquinavir in the hard gelatin capsule formulation (Invirase) has poor bioavailability, it is recommended that this formulation only
be used in combination with other drugs which interact to raise saquinavir blood levels. Saquinavir soft
gelatin capsules (Fortovase) are the preferred dosage
form of this drug.