Definition
Antiacne drugs are medicines that help clear up
pimples, blackheads, whiteheads, and more severe
forms of acne.
Purpose
Different types of antiacne drugs are used for
different purposes. For example, lotions, soaps, gels,
and creams containing benzoyl peroxide or tretinoin
may be used to clear up mild to moderately severe
acne. Isotretinoin (Accutane) is prescribed only for
very severe, disfiguring acne.
Acne is a skin condition that occurs when pores or
hair follicles become blocked. This blockage allows a
waxy material called sebum to collect inside the pores
or follicles. Normally, sebum flows out onto the skin
and hair to form a protective coating, but when it
cannot get out, small swellings develop on the skin
surface. Bacteria and dead skin cells can also collect
that can cause inflammation. Swellings that are small
and not inflamed are whiteheads or blackheads. When
they become inflamed, they turn into pimples. Pimples
that fill with pus are called pustules.
The severity of acne is often influenced by seasonal changes; it is typically less severe in summer than in
winter. In addition, acne in girls is often affected by the
menstrual cycle.
Acne cannot be cured, but acne drugs can help
clear the skin. Benzoyl peroxide and tretinoin work
by mildly irritating the skin. This encourages skin
cells to slough off, which helps open blocked pores.
Benzoyl peroxide also kills bacteria, which helps prevent whiteheads and blackheads from turning into
pimples. Isotretinoin shrinks the glands that produce
sebum.
Description
Benzoyl peroxide is found in many over-the-counter
acne products that are applied to the skin, such
as Benoxyl, Clear By Design, Neutrogena Acne,
PanOxyl, and some formulations of Clean & Clear,
Clearasil, and Oxy. Some benzoyl peroxide products
are available without a physician’s prescription; others
require a prescription. Tretinoin (Retin-A) is available
only with a physician’s prescription and comes in
liquid, cream, and gel forms, which are applied to the
skin. Isotretinoin (Accutane), which is taken by mouth
in capsule form, is available only with a physician’s
prescription. Only physicians who have experience
in diagnosing and treating severe acne, such as dermatologists, should prescribe isotretinoin.
Some newer antiacne preparations combine
benzoyl peroxide with antibiotics. One combination
of benzoyl peroxide with clindamycin is sold under
the trade name BenzaClin.
Many antiacne preparations contain compounds
derived from plants that have anti-inflammatory
properties. One group of researchers listed thirtyeight different plants that are beneficial in treating
acne and other inflammatory skin conditions.
Recommended dosage
The recommended dosage depends on the type of
antiacne drug. These drugs usually come with written
directions for patients and should be used only as
directed. Patients who have questions about how to
use the medicine should check with a physician or
pharmacist.
Patients who use isotretinoin usually take the
medicine for a few months, then stop for at least two
months. Their acne may continue to improve even
after they stop taking the medicine. If the condition is
still severe after several months of treatment and a
two-month break, the physician may prescribe a
second course of treatment.
Precautions
Isotretinoin
Isotretinoin can cause serious birth defects, including mental retardation and physical deformities. This
medicine should not be used during pregnancy.
Women who are able to bear children should not use
isotretinoin unless they have very severe acne that has
not cleared up with the use of other antiacne drugs. In
that case, a woman who uses this drug must have a
pregnancy test two weeks before beginning treatment
and each month they are taking the drug. Another
pregnancy test must be done one month after treatment ends. The woman must use an effective birth
control method for one month before treatment begins
and must continue using it throughout treatment and
for one month after treatment ends. Women who are
able to bear children and who want to use this medicine should discuss this information with their health
care providers. Before using the medicine, they will
be asked to sign a consent form stating that they
understand the danger of taking isotretinoin during
pregnancy and that they agree to use effective birth
control.
Do not donate blood to a blood bank while taking
isotretinoin or for 30 days after treatment with the
drug ends. This will help reduce the chance of a pregnant woman receiving blood containing isotretinoin,
which could cause birth defects.
Isotretinoin may cause a sudden decrease in night
vision. If this happens, do not drive or do anything else
that could be dangerous until vision returns to normal.
Let the physician know about the problem.
This medicine may also make the eyes, nose, and
mouth dry. Ask the physician about using special eye
drops to relieve eye dryness. To temporarily relieve
the dry mouth, chew sugarless gum, suck on sugarless
candy or ice chips, or use saliva substitutes, which
come in liquid and tablet forms and are available
without a prescription. If the problem continues for
more than two weeks, check with a physician or
dentist. Mouth dryness that continues over a long
time may contribute to tooth decay and other dental
problems.
Isotretinoin may increase sensitivity to sunlight.
Patients being treated with this medicine should avoid
exposure to the sun and should not use tanning beds,
tanning booths, or sunlamps until they know how the
drug affects them.
In the early stages of treatment with isotretinoin,
some people’s acne seems to get worse before it starts
getting better. If the condition becomes much worse or
if the skin is very irritated, check with the physician
who prescribed the medicine.
Benzoyl peroxide and tretinoin
When applying antiacne drugs to the skin, be
careful not to get the medicine in the eyes, mouth, or
inside of the nose. Do not put the medicine on skin
that is wind burned, sunburned, or irritated, and do
not apply it to open wounds.
Because such antiacne drugs as benzoyl peroxide
and tretinoin irritate the skin slightly, avoid doing
anything that might cause further irritation. Wash
the face with mild soap and water only two or three
times a day, unless the physician says to wash it more
often. Avoid using abrasive soaps or cleansers and
products that might dry the skin or make it peel,
such as medicated cosmetics, cleansers that contain
alcohol, or other acne products that contain resorcinol, sulfur or salicylic acid.
If benzoyl peroxide or tretinoin make the skin too
red or too dry or cause too much peeling, check with a
physician. Using the medicine less often or using a
weaker strength may be necessary.
Tretinoin may increase sensitivity to sunlight.
While being treated with this medicine, avoid exposure
to the sun and do not use tanning beds, tanning
booths, or sunlamps. If it is not possible to avoid
being in the sun, use a sunscreen with a skin protection
factor (SPF) of at least 15 or wear protective clothing
over the treated areas. The skin may also become
more sensitive to cold and wind. People who use this
medicine should protect their skin from cold and wind
until they know how the medicine affects them.
Benzoyl peroxide may discolor hair or colored
fabrics.
Special conditions
People who have certain medical conditions or
who are taking certain other medicines may have problems if they use antiacne drugs. Before using these
products, be sure to let the physician know about any
of these conditions:ALLERGIES. Anyone who has had unusual reactions
to etretinate, isotretinoin, tretinoin, vitamin A preparations, or benzoyl peroxide in the past should let his or
her physician know before using an antiacne drug. The
physician should also be told about any allergies to
foods, dyes, preservatives, or other substances.PREGNANCY. Women who are pregnant or who
may become pregnant should check with a physician
before using tretinoin or benzoyl peroxide. Isotretinoin
causes birth defects in humans and must not be used
during pregnancy.BREASTFEEDING. No problems have been reported
in nursing babies whose mothers used tretinoin or
benzoyl peroxide. Women who are breastfeeding
babies should not take isotretinoin, however, as it
may cause problems in nursing babies.
OTHER MEDICAL CONDITIONS. Before using antiacne drugs applied to the skin, people with any of these
medical problems should make sure their physicians
are aware of their conditions:

eczema. Antiacne drugs that are applied to the skin
may make this condition worse.

sunburn or raw skin. Antiacne drugs that are applied
to the skin may increase the pain and irritation of
these conditions.
In people with certain medical conditions, isotretinoin may increase the amount of triglyceride
(a fatty-substance) in the blood. This may lead to
heart or blood vessel problems. Before using isotretinoin, people with any of these medical problems
should make sure their physicians are aware of their
conditions:

alcoholism or heavy drinking, now or in the past

diabetes (or family history of diabetes). Isotretinoin
may also change blood sugar levels.

family history of high triglyceride levels in the blood

severe weight problems.
USE OF CERTAIN MEDICINES. Using antiacne drugs
with certain other drugs may affect the way the drugs
work or may increase the chance of side effects.
Side effects
Isotretinoin
Minor discomforts such as dry mouth or nose,
dry eyes, dry skin, or itching usually go away as the
body adjusts to the drug and do not require medical
attention unless they continue or are bothersome.
Other side effects should be brought to a physicians attention. These include:

burning, redness, or itching of the eyes

nosebleeds

signs of inflammation of the lips, such as peeling,
burning, redness or pain
Bowel inflammation is not a common side effect,
but it may occur. If any of the following signs of bowel
inflammation occur, stop taking isotretinoin immediately and check with a physician:

pain in the abdomen

bleeding from the rectum

severe diarrhea
Benzoyl peroxide and tretinoin
The most common side effects of antiacne drugs
applied to the skin are slight redness, dryness, peeling,
and stinging, and a warm feeling to the skin. These
problems usually go away as the body adjusts to the
drug and do not require medical treatment.
Other side effects should be brought to a physician’s attention. Check with a physician as soon as
possible if any of the following side effects occur:

blistering, crusting or swelling of the skin

severe burning or redness of the skin

darkening or lightening of the skin. (This effect will
eventually go away after treatment with an antiacne
drug ends.)

skin rash
Other side effects are possible with any type of
antiacne drug. Anyone who has unusual symptoms
while using antiacne drugs should get in touch with
his or her physician.
Interactions
Patients using antiacne drugs on their skin should
tell their physicians if they are using any other prescription or nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicine that they apply to the skin in the same area.
Isotretinoin may interact with other medicines.
When this happens, the effects of one or both drugs
may change or the risk of side effects may be greater.
Anyone who takes isotretinoin should let the physician know about all other medicines he or she is taking
and should ask whether the possible interactions can
interfere with drug therapy. Among the drugs that
may interact with isotretinoin are:

etretinate (Tegison), used to treat severe psoriasis.
Using this medicine with isotretinoin increases side
effects.

tretinoin (Retin-A, Renova). Using this medicine
with isotretinoin increases side effects.
vitamin A or any medicine containing vitamin A.
Using any vitamin A preparations with isotretinoin
increases side effects. Do not take vitamin supplements containing vitamin A while taking isotretinoin.

tetracyclines (used to treat infections). Using these
medicines with isotretinoin increases the chance of
swelling of the brain. Make sure the physician knows
if tetracycline is being used to treat acne or another
infection.