Definition
Anti-insomnia drugs are medicines that help
people fall asleep or stay asleep.
Purpose
Physicians prescribe anti-insomnia drugs for shortterm treatment of insomnia—a sleep problem in which
people have trouble falling asleep or staying asleep or
wake up too early and can’t go back to sleep. These drugs
should be used only for occasional treatment of temporary sleepproblems and should not be taken formore than
a week or two at a time. People whose sleep problems last
longer than this should see a physician. Their sleep problems could be a sign of another medical problem.
Description
The anti-insomnia drug described here, zolpidem
(Ambien), is a classified as a central nervous system
(CNS) depressant. CNS depressants are medicines
that slow the nervous system. Physicians also prescribe
medicines in the benzodiazepine family, such as flurazepam (Dalmane), quazepam (Doral), triazolam
(Halcion), estazolam (ProSom), and temazepam
(Restoril), for insomnia. Benzodiazepine drugs are
described in the essay on antianxiety drugs. Zaleplon
(Sonata) is another anti-insomnia drug that is not
related to other drugs with the same effect. The barbiturates, such as pentobarbital (Nembutal) and secobarbital (Seconal) are no longer commonly used to treat
insomnia because they are too dangerous if they are
taken in overdoses. For patients with mild insomnia,
some antihistamines, such as diphenhydramine
(Benadryl) or hydroxyzine (Atarax) may be used,
since these also cause sleepiness.
Zolpidem is available only with a physician’s
prescription and comes in tablet form.
Recommended dosage
The recommended dose for adults is 5-10 mg just
before bedtime. The medicine works quickly, often
within 20 minutes, so it should be taken right before
going to bed.
For older people and others who may be more
sensitive to the drug’s effects, the recommended starting dosage is 5 mg just before bedtime.
Zolpidem may be taken with food or on an
empty stomach, but it may work faster when taken
on an empty stomach. Check with a physician or
pharmacists for instructions on how to take the
medicine.
Precautions
Zolpidem is meant only for short-term treatment
of insomnia. If sleep problems last more than seven to
10 days, check with a physician. Longer-lasting sleep
problems could be a sign of another medical problem.
Also, this drug may lose its effectiveness when taken
every night for more than a few weeks.
Some people feel drowsy, dizzy, confused, lightheaded, or less alert the morning after they have taken
zolpidem. The medicine may also cause clumsiness,
unsteadiness, double vision, or other vision problems
the next day. For these reasons, anyone who takes
these drugs should not drive, use machines or do anything else that might be dangerous until they have
found out how zolpidem affects them.
This medicine has caused cause behavior changes
in some people, similar to those seen in people whose
behavior changes when they drink alcohol. Examples
include giddiness and rage. More extreme changes,
such as confusion, agitation, and hallucinations, also
are possible. Anyone who starts having strange or
unusual thoughts or behavior while taking this medicine should get in touch with his or her physician.
Zolpidem and other sleep medicines may cause a
special type of temporary memory loss, in which the
person does not remember what happens between the
time they take the medicine and the time its effects
wear off. This is usually not a problem, because people
go to sleep right after taking the medicine and stay
asleep until its effects wear off. But it could be a
problem for anyone who has to wake up before getting
a full night’s sleep (seven to eight hours). In particular,
travelers should not take this medicine on airplane
flights of less than seven to eight hours.
Because zolpidem works work on the central
nervous system, it may add to the effects of alcohol
and other drugs that slow down the central nervous
system, such as antihistamines, cold medicine,
allergy medicine, medicine for seizures, tranquilizers, some pain relievers, and muscle relaxants.
Zolpidem may also add to the effects of anesthetics,
including those used for dental procedures. The
combined effects of zolpidem and alcohol or other
CNS depressants (drugs that slow the central nervous system) can be very dangerous, leading to
unconsciousness or even death. People who take
zolpidem should not drink alcohol and should
check with their physicians before taking any other
CNS depressant. Anyone who shows signs of an
overdose or of the effects of combining zolpidem
drugs with alcohol or other drugs should have
immediate emergency help. Warning signs include
severe drowsiness, severe nausea or vomiting, breathing problems, and staggering.
Anyone who takes zolpidem for more than 1–2
weeks should not stop taking it without first checking
with a physician. Stopping the drug abruptly may
cause rebound insomnia; increased difficulty falling
asleep for the first one of two nights after the drug
has been discontinued. In rare cases, withdrawal
symptoms, such as vomiting, cramps, and unpleasant
feelings may occur. Gradual tapering may be
necessary.
Older people may be more sensitive to the effects
of zolpidem. This may increase the chance of side
effects, such as confusion, and may also increase the
risk of falling.
In people with breathing problems, zolpidem may
worsen the symptoms.
Special conditions
People with certain other medical conditions or
who are taking certain other medicines can have problems if they take zolpidem. Before taking this medicine, be sure to let the physician know about any of
these conditions:
 ALLERGIES. Anyone who has had unusual reactions to zolpidem in the past should let his or her
physician know before taking the drugs again. The
physician should also be told about any allergies to
foods, dyes, preservatives, or other substances.
 PREGNANCY. Women who are pregnant or who
may become pregnant should check with their physicians about the safety of using zolpidem during
pregnancy.
 BREASTFEEDING. Women who are breastfeeding
should check with their physicians before using
zolpidem.
OTHER MEDICAL CONDITIONS. Before using zolpidem, people with any of these medical problems
should make sure their physicians are aware of their
conditions:

Chronic lung diseases (emphysema, asthma, or
chronic bronchitis)

Liver disease

Kidney disease

Current or past alcohol or drug abuse

Depression

Sleep apnea
USE OF CERTAIN MEDICINES. Taking zolpidem with
certain other drugs may affect the way the drugs work
or may increase the chance of side effects.
Side effects
The most common minor side effects are daytime
drowsiness or a ‘‘drugged’’ feeling, vision problems,
memory problems, nightmares or unusual dreams,
vomiting, nausea, abdominal or stomach pain, diarrhea, dry mouth, headache, and general feeling of discomfort or illness. These problems usually go away as
the body adjusts to the drug and do not require medical treatment.
More serious side effects are not common, but
may occur. If any of the following side effects occur,
check with the physician who prescribed the medicine
as soon as possible:

Confusion

Depression

Clumsiness or unsteadiness
Patients who take zolpidem may notice side
effects for several weeks after they stop taking the
drug. They should check with their physicians if
these or other troublesome symptoms occur:

Agitation, nervousness, feelings of panic

Uncontrolled crying

Worsening of mental or emotional problems

Seizures

Tremors

Lightheadedness

Sweating

Flushing

Nausea or abdominal or stomach cramps

Muscle cramps

Unusual tiredness or weakness
Other rare side effects may occur. Anyone who
has unusual symptoms after taking zolpidem should
get in touch with his or her physician.
Interactions
Zolpidem may interact with other medicines.
When this happens, the effects of one or both of the
drugs may change or the risk of side effects may be
greater. Anyone who takes zolpidem should let the
physician know all other medicines he or she is
taking. Among the drugs that may interact with zolpidem are:

Other central nervous system (CNS) depressants
such as medicine for allergies, colds, hay fever, and
asthma; sedatives; tranquilizers; prescription pain
medicine; muscle relaxants; medicine for seizures;
barbiturates; and anesthetics.

The major tranquilizer chlorpromazine (Thorazine).

Tricyclic antidepressants such as imipramine
(Tofranil) and amitriptyline (Elavil)