Definition
Antiasthmatic drugs are medicines that treat or
prevent asthma attacks.
Purpose
For people with asthma, the simple act of breathing can be a struggle. Their airways become inflamed
and blocked with mucus during asthma attacks, narrowing the opening through which air passes. This is
not such a problem when the person breathes in,
because the airways naturally expand when a person
takes a breath. The real problem arises when the person with asthma tries to breathe out. The air cannot
get out through the blocked airways, so it stays
trapped in the lungs. With each new breath, the person
can take in only a little more air, so breathing becomes
shallow and takes more and more effort.
Asthma attacks can be caused by allergies to pollen, dust, pets or other things, but people without
known allergies may also have asthma. Exercise, stress,
intense emotions, exposure to cold, certain medicines
and some medical conditions also can bring on attacks.
The two main approaches to dealing with asthma
are avoiding substances and situations that trigger
attacks and using medicines that treat or prevent the
symptoms. With a combination of the two, most people with asthma can find relief and live normal lives.
Description
Three types of drugs are used in treating and preventing asthma attacks:

Bronchodilators relax the smooth muscles that line
the airway. This makes the airways open wider, letting more air pass through them. These drugs are
used mainly to relieve sudden asthma attacks or to
prevent attacks that might come on after exercise.
They may be taken by mouth, injected or inhaled.
Bronchodilators may be taken in pill or liquid form,
but normally are used as inhalers, which go directly
to the lungs and result in fewer side effects.

Corticosteroids block the inflammation that narrows
the airways. Used regularly, these drugs will help prevent asthma attacks. Those attacks that do occur will
be less severe. However, corticosteroids cannot stop
an attack that is already underway. These drugs may
be taken by mouth, injected or inhaled.
Leukotriene modifiers (montelukast and zafirlukast)
are a new type of drug that can be used in place of
steroids, for older children or adults who have a mild
degree of asthma that persists. They work by counteracting leukotrienes, which are substances released
by white blood cells in the lung that cause the air
passages to constrict and promote mucus secretion.
Leukotriene modifiers also fight off some forms of
rhinitis, an added bonus for people with asthma.
However, they are not proven effective in fighting
seasonal allergies.

Cromolyn also is taken regularly to prevent asthma
attacks and may be used alone or with other asthma
medicines. It cannot stop an attack that already has
started. The drug works by preventing certain cells in
the body from releasing substances that cause allergic reactions or asthma symptoms. One brand of this
drug, Nasalcrom, comes in capsule and nasal spray
forms and is used to treat hay fever and other allergies. The inhalation form of the drug, Intal, is used
for asthma. It comes in aerosol canisters, in capsules
that are inserted into an inhaler, and in liquid form
that is used in a nebulizer.
Precautions
Using antiasthmatic drugs properly is important.
Because bronchodilators provide quick relief, some people may be tempted to overuse them. However, with
some kinds of bronchodilators, this can lead to serious
and possibly life-threatening complications. In the long
run, patients are better off using bronchodilators only as
directed and also using corticosteroids, which eventually
will reduce their need for bronchodilators. However, a
2004 Canadian study has questioned a standard practice
of increasing steroids after asthma attacks or worsened
symptoms. Also, research in 2004 showed that people
with asthma who worked closely with their physicians to
self-manage their asthma had fewer attacks, which
reduces the need for bronchodilators. Carefully managing asthma also reduces visits to the emergency department and hospitalizations.
Corticosteroids are powerful drugs that may
cause serious side effects when used over a long time.
However, these problems are much less likely with the
inhalant forms than with the oral and injected forms.
While the oral and injected forms generally should be
used only for one to two weeks, the inhalant forms
may be used for long periods.
It is important to remember that leukotriene modifiers are used to prevent and manage asthma, not to
stop an attack. A physician or pharmacist can advise
patients on possible interactions with other drugs.
Patients who are using their antiasthmatic drugs
correctly but feel their asthma is not under control
should see their physicians. The physician can either
increase the dose, switch to another medicine or add
another medicine to the regimen. A 2004 survey
showed that 70% of people with mild to moderate
asthma were not taking the correct dose of asthma
medication.
When used to prevent asthma attacks, cromolyn
must be taken as directed every day. The drug may
take as long as four weeks to start working. Unless
told to do so by a physician, patients should not stop
taking the drug just because it does not seem to be
working. When symptoms do begin to improve,
patients should continue taking all medicines that
have been prescribed, unless a physician directs
otherwise.
Side effects
Inhalant forms of antiasthmatic drugs may cause
dryness or irritation in the throat, dry mouth, or an
unpleasant taste in the mouth. To help prevent these
problems, gargling and rinsing the mouth or taking a
sip of water after each dose is recommended.
More serious side effects are not common when
these medicines are used properly. However, anyone
who has unusual or bothersome symptoms after taking an antiasthmatic drug should get in touch with a
physician.
Interactions
A physician or pharmacist should be consulted
before combining antiasthmatic drugs with any other
prescription or nonprescription (over-the-counter)
medicine.