Definition
Purpose
SSRIs are prescribed primarily to treat mental
depression. Because they are as effective as other
types of antidepressants and have less serious side
effects, SSRIs have become the most commonly prescribed antidepressants for all age groups, including
children and adolescents.
In addition to treating depression, some SSRIs
have been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) for the treatment of other disorders including:
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)

generalized anxiety disorder

panic disorder

social anxiety disorder or social phobia

premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD) or
premenstrual syndrome (PMS)

post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)

bulimia nervosa, an eating disorder.
SSRIs often are prescribed for other ‘‘off-label’’
uses including:

various mental disorders including schizophrenia

mania

menopause-related symptoms such as hot flashes

geriatric depression

loss of mental abilities in the elderly

nicotine withdrawal

alcoholism

premature ejaculation
The advantages of SSRIs over other types of antidepressants include:

Most SSRIs can be taken in one daily dose as compared with three to six daily pills.

Because they lessen cravings for carbohydrates,
SSRIs usually do not cause weight gain.

Since SSRIs do not appear to affect the cardiovascular system, they can be prescribed for people with
high blood pressure or heart conditions.

Since SSRIs are not particularly dangerous even in high
doses and are unlikely to cause permanent damage if
misused, they may be prescribed for suicidal adults.
SSRIs are mood enhancers only in depressed individuals. They have little effect on people who are not
clinically depressed. However some experts believe
that SSRIs are over-prescribed and should be reserved
for those with major disabling depression.
Description
Types of SSRIs
As of 2005, six brand-name SSRIs and generic
equivalents were available in the United States:

Celexa (citalopram hydrobromide) for treating
depression

Lexapro (escitalopram oxalate) for treating depression and generalized anxiety disorder

Luvox (fluvoxamine) for treating OCD

Paxil (paroxetine hydrochloride) for treating
depression, generalized anxiety disorder, OCD,
panic disorder, social anxiety disorder, PMDD, and
PTSD

Prozac and Prozac Weekly (fluoxetine) for treating
depression, OCD, and bulimia nervosa; marketed as
Sarafem for treating PMDD

Zoloft (sertraline) for treating depression, OCD,
panic disorder, social anxiety disorder, PMDD, and
 PTSD.
When Prozac first became available in 1988, it was
hailed as a new wonder drug and quickly became themost
popular antidepressant ever prescribed. Many millions
of Americans have taken Prozac and more than 70%
of them claim to have benefited from it. Within a few
years other SSRIs became available and, by 2000, Zoloft
prescriptions outnumbered those for Prozac.
Lexapro is the newest SSRI. Celexa and Lexapro
are very similar, with chemical structures unrelated to
other SSRIs. Celexa is a mixture of two isomers—
forms of the same chemical—whereas Lexapro is the
active isomer alone. They appear to be highly selective
for serotonin, only minimally inhibiting the reuptake
of the neurotransmitters norepinephrine and dopamine. Paxil is structurally unrelated to other SSRIs
and is more selective for serotonin than Luvox,
Prozac, or Zoloft, but less selective than Celexa and
Lexapro. Paxil becomes distributed widely throughout body tissues and the CNS, with only 1% remaining in the circulatory system.
Mode of action
Mental depression is believed to be related to the
low activity of one or more neurotransmitters in the
brain—the chemical messengers that cross the gap or
synapse between nerve cells. Although it is not understood exactly how most SSRIs work, they are designed
to increase the level of serotonin in the brain. This can
reduce the symptoms of depression and other psychological disorders.
Serotonin is released by nerve cells and then—in a
process called reuptake—is reabsorbed by the cells to
be used again. SSRIs interfere with reuptake by blocking the serotonin reuptake sites on the surfaces of
nerve cells, thereby making more serotonin available
for brain activity. Paxil inhibits the transporter molecule that moves serotonin back into the cell. SSRIs are
said to selectively interfere with the reuptake of serotonin, without affecting the uptake or activities of
other neurotransmitters. In contrast, older antidepressants such as tricyclic antidepressants and monoamine
oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) affect numerous neurotransmitters, brain cell receptors, and brain processes,
increasing the likelihood of serious side effects.
However it is becoming clear that the serotonin
neurotransmitter system is far more complex and widespread throughout the body than was thought initially.
Although serotonin receptors are particularly common
in areas of the brain that control emotion, it is known
now that there are at least six different types of serotonin
receptors that send different signals to different parts of
the brain. Serotonin also appears to affect other neurotransmitter systems—including dopamine—to at least
some extent. Thus increasing the levels of serotonin may
not be the only reason why SSRIs relieve depression.
Effectiveness
SSRIs are not effective for treating anxiety or
depression in 20–40% of patients. However some
research suggests that the use of SSRIs in the early stages
of depression can prevent major depressive disorders.
Although different SSRIs appear to be equally
effective, individuals respond differently to different
SSRIs and side effects may vary. Thus finding the best
SSRI for an individual may be a matter of trial-anderror. It usually takes two to four weeks after starting an
SSRI before symptoms begin to improve. Luvox may
take one to two months for noticeable improvement.
Paxil may take as long as several months, although
sleeping often improves within one or two weeks of
beginning the medication. If there is no response after
a few weeks or if side effects occur, the patient may be
switched to another SSRI. Prozac is the most commonly
prescribed SSRI for children, in part because it is available in liquid form that is easier to swallow.
Although Luvox is the only SSRI that is FDAapproved for use in children—and only for obsessivecompulsive behavior—thousands of young people
have been treated with SSRIs for:

depression

anxiety

OCD

panic

attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
A 2004 study found that among depressed adolescents, 60% improved with Prozac alone, whereas 75%
reported improvement with Prozac combined with
cognitive behavioral therapy.
SSRIs sometimes are prescribed to relieve depression accompanying alcoholism. A recent study found
that, although type A alcoholics responded to Zoloft
in conjunction with a 12-step individual therapy program, type B alcoholics—those with the most severe
drinking problems—did not benefit from Zoloft and,
in some cases, increased their alcohol intake.
Recommended dosage
Usually SSRIs are started with a low dosage that
may be gradually increased. In older adults SSRIs
remain in the body longer than in younger adults.
The blood levels of Paxil can be 70–80% higher in
the elderly as compared with younger patients.
Therefore lower doses usually are prescribed for
older people. Older patients with other medical conditions or who are taking many different drugs also
may need smaller or less frequent doses. The dosage
of an SSRI also varies according to the individual
and the condition that is being treated. SSRIs may be
taken with or without food, on a full or empty
stomach. However taking SSRIs with food or drink
may lessen side effects such as stomach upset or
nausea.
Celexa is supplied as tablets or as an oral solution
equivalent to 2 mg per ml (0.03 oz.), taken once per
day in the morning or evening:

adults: 20 mg per day, increasing to 40 mg if necessary, to a maximum of 60 mg per day

older adults: 20 mg per day to a maximum of 40 mg
Lexapro is supplied as 5-, 10-, or 20-mg tablets or
as a 1 mg per ml (0.03 oz.) liquid. The recommended
dose is 10 mg per day, with a possible increase to 20 mg
per day after at least one week.
Average dosages of Luvox for treating OCD and
depression are:

adults: one 50-mg tablet at bedtime; may be
increased up to a maximum of 300 mg daily; dosages
of more than 100 mg per day should be divided into
two doses, one taken in the evening and one in the
morning

children aged 8–17: initially one 25-mg tablet at
bedtime; may be gradually increased by 25 mg
per day every four to seven days, up to a maximum of 200 mg per day; daily dosages of more
than 50 mg should be divided into two daily
doses.
Average doses of Paxil for treating depression are:

adults: 20 mg (10 ml, 0.3 oz.) of oral suspension, one
20-mg tablet, or one 25-mg extended-release tablet,
once a day in the morning, increased by 10 mg per
week to a maximum of 50 mg—25 ml (0.75 oz.) of
oral suspension—or a 62.5-mg extended-release
tablet

older adults: 10 mg (5 ml, 0.15 oz.) of oral suspension
or a 10-mg tablet daily, increased to a maximum of
40 mg (20 ml, 0.6 oz.); one 12.5-mg extended-release
tablet daily, increased to a maximum of 50 mg
Because of its sedating effect, Paxil may be taken
in the evening rather than in the morning as usually
recommended. Oral suspensions need to be shaken
well before measuring with a small measuring cup or
measuring spoon. Extended-release tablets should be
swallowed whole, not broken or chewed. Dosages may
be different for treating disorders other than
depression.
Typical dosages of Prozac are:

one 10–20-mg daily capsule or solution taken in the
morning; increased up to as much as 40 mg daily if
there is no improvement in one month, up to an
80-mg maximum

one 90-mg capsule per week of Prozac Weekly once
the depression is under control

one 20-mg capsule of Sarafem per day, taken in the
morning, every day or for only 14 days of a menstrual cycle; maximum of 80 mg per day; Sarafem is
supplied in seven-day blister packs to help keep track
of the days

children: initially one 5–10-mg capsule or solution
per day.
Zoloft is available as capsules, oral solutions, or
tablets:

adults: 50 mg daily, taken in the morning or evening,
up to a maximum of 200 mg daily for severely
depressed individuals

older adults: 12.5–25 mg per day, taken in the morning or evening; may be increased gradually

for treating OCD in children aged 6–12: 25 mg per
day, taken in the morning or evening; may be
increased gradually to a maximum of 200 mg per day

children aged 13–17: initially 50 mg per day, in the
morning or evening, may be increased gradually to a
maximum of 200 mg per day.
Zoloft oral concentrate should be mixed with 4 oz
(133 ml) of water, ginger ale, lemon-lime soda, lemonade, or orange juice and taken immediately.
Missed doses of SSRIs are handled differently
depending on the SSRI and the number of doses
per day. An effective SSRI may be prescribed for
six months or more. Some experts recommend continuing on the SSRI indefinitely to prevent the recurrence
of depression
Precautions
Medical conditions
Medical conditions that may affect the use or
dosage of at least some SSRIs include:

drug allergies or allergies to other substances in
medications

mania

manic-depressive (bipolar) disorder

brain disease or mental retardation

seizures or epilepsy

Parkinson s disease

liver or severe kidney disease

abnormal bleeding problems

diabetes mellitus

heart disease

a recent heart attack

glaucoma
SSRI use during pregnancy may not be safe, particularly during the third trimester. Exposure of fetuses
to Celexa and other SSRIs during the late third trimester have led to very serious complications, including
serotonin syndrome—a condition in which high serotonin levels cause severe problems. Symptoms in a newborn may be the result of a direct toxic effect of the
SSRI or withdrawal from the drug. SSRIs pass into
breast milk and may negatively affect a baby.
Suicidal tendencies
A possible link between SSRIs and suicide
attempts in depressed adults remains controversial.
Three studies in early 2005 drew conflicting conclusions concerning an association between suicidal
behavior and the use of SSRIs. However a February
2005 study found a close correlation between the dramatic decrease in suicides in the United States and
Europe and the introduction of SSRIs.
In October 2004, the FDA concluded that antidepressants, including SSRIs, increased the risk of
suicidal thoughts and behaviors in children and adolescents who suffered from depression and other psychiatric disorders. They recommended extreme
caution in prescribing SSRIs for children. In the last
three months of 2004, SSRI prescriptions for children
and adolescents fell by 10%.
Symptoms that may lead to suicidal tendencies
can develop very suddenly in children and adolescents
taking SSRIs; they may include:

new or worsening depression

severe worrying

irritability

agitation

extreme restlessness

frenzied excitement

panic attacks

insomnia

impulsive behavior

aggressive behavior

thinking about, planning, or attempting to harm
one’s self
Withdrawal
SSRIs remain in the body for some time after the
medication is stopped:

Celexa for at least three days

Luvox for at least 32 hours

Paxil for at least 42 hours

Prozac for up to five weeks

Zoloft for at least three to five days
SSRIs can cause what the manufacturers refer to
as ‘‘discontinuation syndrome’’ when the medication
is stopped. Since this occurs most often when the drug
is stopped abruptly, usually the dose is gradually
reduced before stopping the drug completely. The
occurrence of discontinuation syndrome depends on
the SSRI, the dosage, and the length of time that the
drug was used. Paxil appears to induce more serious
withdrawal symptoms than other SSRIs. Symptoms of
Paxil withdrawal appear within 1 to 10 days of stopping the drug. Because of its long half-life in the body,
Prozac rarely causes withdrawal symptoms, although
symptoms have been known to appear within 5 to 42
days of stopping Prozac.
Withdrawal symptoms may include:

generally feeling sick

dry mouth

runny nose

dizziness or lightheadedness

nausea and vomiting

diarrhea

headache

sweating

muscle pain
weakness or fatigue

nervousness or anxiety

restlessness or agitation

trembling or shaking

insomnia

fast heart rate

breathing difficulties

chest pain

confusion
Although withdrawal symptoms usually wear off,
in some patients some symptoms appear to continue
indefinitely.
Other precautions
Other precautions concerning SSRIs include:

a 50% chance that an episode of depression will recur
at some point after stopping the drug

a 90% risk of recurrence following two episodes of
depression

reports of patients developing tolerance to an SSRI,
requiring increased dosages for effectiveness

the long-term effects of SSRIs are unknown

SSRIs are expensive: at least $2–$3 per pill; over $150
for 4 oz. (133 ml) of liquid Prozac

some insurance plans to not cover mental health
medications.
Side effects
Common side effects
The most common side effects of SSRIs include:

dry mouth

dizziness

sour or acid stomach or gas

heartburn

decreased appetite

stomach upset

nausea

diarrhea

sweating

headache

weakness or fatigue

drowsiness

insomnia

nervousness or anxiety

tremors

sexual problems
Most common side effects disappear as the body
adjusts to the drug. Nausea may be relieved by taking
the medication with meals or temporarily dividing the
dose in half.
Certain side effects occur more frequently depending on the SSRI:

Side effects of Celexa usually are mild and disappear
as the body adjusts.

Luvox and Zoloft are more likely to cause gastrointestinal upset, including stomach irritation, nausea,
and diarrhea.

Paxil is more likely to cause dry mouth, constipation,
and drowsiness. Paxil is significantly more sedating
than other SSRIs, which may benefit patients with
insomnia.

The most common side effect of Prozac is nausea
during the first two weeks on the drug; nervousness
and anxiety also are common with Prozac.

Paxil, Prozac, and Zoloft often reduce appetite.

Up to 30% of those on Zoloft suffer headaches and
20% suffer from insomnia.
Studies with Luvox have found that children may
experience different side effects than adults, the most
common being:

dry mouth

a stuffy or bloody nose

sweating

drowsiness

restlessness

muscle twitching or tics

tremors

thinning hair

abnormal thinking
Sexual side effects
Any SSRI can affect sexual interest or performance. Side effects include increased or, more often,
decreased sexual interest, difficulty reaching orgasm
or ejaculation, and impotence.
Although manufacturers initially reported that
sexual problems were very rare side effects of
SSRIs, most patients in clinical trials were never
asked specifically about sex and were reluctant to
raise the issue. After a few years it became apparent
that sexual problems were commonplace among
SSRI users, affecting as many as 70%. Among
men taking Paxil, 23% report problems with ejaculation. Between 40% and 70% of those taking
Prozac report negative sexual side effects, especially
loss of interest.
Less common or rare side effects
Less common—but potentially serious—side
effects of at least some SSRIs may include:

flu-like symptoms

sneezing

nasal congestion or a runny nose

sore throat

skin rash

itching or tingling, burning, or prickling of the skin

fever

chills

body aches or pain

muscle or joint pain

abdominal cramps or pain

vomiting

decreased or increased appetite

weight loss

weight gain, especially after a year on an SSRI

mouth watering

increased frequency or amount of urination

constipation

menstrual changes or pain

chest congestion or pain

difficulty breathing

taste changes, including a metallic taste in the mouth

blurred vision or other visual changes

loss of voice

teeth grinding

trembling or shaking

hair loss

sensitivity to sunlight

anxiety or agitation

abnormal dreams

confusion

lack of emotion, apathy

memory loss
Rare side effects that may occur with some SSRIs
include:

symptoms of low blood sugar or sodium

bleeding gums or nosebleeds

unusual bruising

irregular or slow heartbeat (less than 50 beats per
minute)

fainting

painful urination or other difficulties with urination

purple or red spots on the skin

skin conditions

red or irritated eyes

inability to move the eyes

swelling of the face, ankles, or hands

increased or decreased body movements

clumsiness

tics or other sudden or unusual body or facial movements or postures

changes in the breasts, including leakage of milk

seizures

irritability

increased depression

mood or mental changes

abnormal behaviors

difficulty concentrating

lethargy or stupor

hallucinations

suicidal thoughts or tendencies
Various other SSRI side effects have been
observed in clinical practice although their incidence
is not known.
Symptoms of overdose
Although overdose rarely occurs with SSRIs,
symptoms include two or more severe side effects
occurring together. More common symptoms of
SSRI overdose include:

flushing of the face

enlarged pupils

fast heart rate

upset stomach
nausea and vomiting

sweating

dizziness

irritability

drowsiness

insomnia

trembling or shaking
Rare symptoms of SSRI overdose include:

deep or fast breathing with dizziness

fainting

muscle pain

weakness

difficulty urinating

bluish skin or lips

fast, slow, or irregular heartbeat

low blood pressure

confusion

memory loss

seizures

coma
Interactions
SSRIs interact with many other drugs, often in
similar ways. Alcohol may increase SSRI-induced
drowsiness and should not be used when taking some
SSRIs. Luvox appears to cause the most serious drug
interactions, whereas Celexa has relatively few interactions. A combination of Luvox and Clozaril can cause
low blood pressure and seizures.
The interaction of SSRIs with MAOIs can be
fatal. In addition to antidepressant MAOIs, the
antibiotic linezolid (Zyvox) is an MAOI. There
must be at least a two-week interval between stopping one drug and starting the other. There should
be at least a three-week interval between an MAOI
and either Paxil or Zoloft, if either type of antidepressant was taken for more than three months.
Because of its long half-life in the body, it is necessary to wait five to six weeks after stopping Prozac
before starting on an MAOI.
Some of the drugs that can interact negatively
with SSRIs include:

other antidepressants

antihistamines

various medications for anxiety, mental illness, or
seizures

sedatives and tranquilizers

sleeping pills

St. John’s wort
Drugs that may cause severe heart problems if
taken in conjunction with some SSRIs include:

astemizole (Hismanal)

cisapride (Propulsid)

terfenadine (Seldane)

thioridazine (Mellaril), which should not be taken
for at least five weeks after stopping Prozac
Drugs that may affect the blood levels of an SSRI
or the length of time that an SSRI remains in the body
include:

antifungal drugs

cimetidine (Tagamet)

erythromycin

tricyclic antidepressants

Dilantin and phenobarbitol, which may decrease the
blood levels of Paxil
Some SSRIs may cause higher blood levels of
other medications including:

alprazolam (Xanax and others)

anticoagulants or blood-thinners such as warfarin
(Coumadin)—SSRIs can increase warfarin blood
levels dramatically

aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs) including ibuprofen and
naproxen

caffeine

carbamazepine (Tegretol)

diazepam (Valium)

digitalis glycosides (heart medicines)

lithium

methadone

phenytoin (Dilantin and others)

propanolol (Ineral and others)

theophylline or theophylline-containing drugs

triazolam (Halcion and others)

tricyclic antidepressants
Serotonin syndrome
Rarely, some drugs may interact with an SSRI to
cause serotonin syndrome including:

buspirone (BuSpar)

bromocriptine (Parlodel)

dextromethorphan (cough medicine such as Robitussin
DM)

levodopa (Sinemet)

lithium (Eskalith)

meperidine (Demerol)

moclobemide (Manerex)

nefazodone (Serzone)

pentazocine (Talwin)

other SSRIs

street drugs

sumatriptan (Imitrex)

tramadol (Ultram)

trazodone (Desyrel)

tryptophan

venlafaxine (Effexor)
Serotonin syndrome may occur shortly after the
dose of a drug is increased.
Serotonin syndrome may be suspected when at
least three of the following symptoms occur
together:

diarrhea

fever

shivering

sweating

restlessness

agitation

uncontrollable excitement

poor coordination

twitching

trembling or shaking

rigidity

confusion

mental changes

fluctuating vital signs
Combined treatments
Increasingly physicians are combining an SSRI
with other medications, either to increase effectiveness
or to counteract side effects. Prozac sometimes is prescribed along with:

an anti-anxiety drug such as Valium (diazepam)

Desyrel (trazodone), a different type of antidepressant, for patients with insomnia

lithium