Definition
Anxiety is a multisystem response to a perceived
threat or danger. It reflects a combination of biochemical changes in the body, the patient’s personal history
and memory, and the social situation. As far as we
know, anxiety is a uniquely human experience. Other
animals clearly know fear, but human anxiety involves
an ability, to use memory and imagination to move
backward and forward in time, that animals do
not appear to have. The anxiety that occurs in posttraumatic syndromes indicates that human memory is
a much more complicated mental function than animal memory. Moreover, a large portion of human
anxiety is produced by anticipation of future events.
Without a sense of personal continuity over time,
people would not have the ‘‘raw materials’’ of anxiety.
It is important to distinguish between anxiety as a
feeling or experience, and an anxiety disorder as a
psychiatric diagnosis. A person may feel anxious without having an anxiety disorder. In addition, a person
facing a clear and present danger or a realistic fear is
not usually considered to be in a state of anxiety. In
addition, anxiety frequently occurs as a symptom in
other categories of psychiatric disturbance.
Description
Although anxiety is a commonplace experience
that everyone has from time to time, it is difficult to
describe concretely because it has so many different
potential causes and degrees of intensity. Doctors
sometimes categorize anxiety as an emotion or an
affect depending on whether it is being described by
the person having it (emotion) or by an outside observer (affect). The word emotion is generally used for the
biochemical changes and feeling state that underlie a
person’s internal sense of anxiety. Affect is used to
describe the person’s emotional state from an observer’s perspective. If a doctor says that a patient has an
anxious affect, he or she means that the patient
appears nervous or anxious, or responds to others in
an anxious way (for example, the individual is shaky,
tremulous, etc.).
Although anxiety is related to fear, it is not the
same thing. Fear is a direct, focused response to a
specific event or object, and the person is consciously
aware of it. Most people will feel fear if someone
points a loaded gun at them or if they see a tornado
forming on the horizon. They also will recognize that
they are afraid. Anxiety, on the other hand, is often
unfocused, vague, and hard to pin down to a specific
cause. In this form it is called free-floating anxiety
Sometimes anxiety being experienced in the present
may stem from an event or person that produced
pain and fear in the past, but the anxious individual
is not consciously aware of the original source of the
feeling. It is anxiety’s aspect of remoteness that makes
it hard for people to compare their experiences of it.
Whereas most people will be fearful in physically dangerous situations, and can agree that fear is an appropriate response in the presence of danger, anxiety is
often triggered by objects or events that are unique
and specific to an individual. An individual might be
anxious because of a unique meaning or memory
being stimulated by present circumstances, not
because of some immediate danger. Another individual looking at the anxious person from the outside
may be truly puzzled as to the reason for the person’s
anxiety.
Causes and symptoms
Anxiety can have a number of different causes. It is
a multidimensional response to stimuli in the person’s
environment, or a response to an internal stimulus (for
example, a hypochondriac’s reaction to a stomach
rumbling) resulting from a combination of general
biological and individual psychological processes.
Physical
In some cases, anxiety is produced by physical
responses to stress, or by certain disease processes or
medications.
THE AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM (ANS). The nervous system of human beings is ‘‘hard-wired’’ to
respond to dangers or threats. These responses are
not subject to conscious control, and are the same in
humans as in lower animals. They represent an evolutionary adaptation to the animal predators and other
dangers with which all animals, including primitive
humans, had to cope. The most familiar reaction of
this type is the so-called ‘‘fight-or-flight’’ response.
This response is the human organism’s automatic
‘‘red alert’’ in a life-threatening situation. It is a state
of physiological and emotional hyperarousal marked
by high muscle tension and strong feelings of fear or
anger. When a person has a fight-or-flight reaction,
the level of stress hormones in their blood rises. They
become more alert and attentive, their eyes dilate, their
heartbeat increases, their breathing rate increases, and
their digestion slows down, allowing more energy to be
available to the muscles.
This emergency reaction is regulated by a part
of the nervous system called the autonomic nervous
system, or ANS. The ANS is controlled by the
hypothalamus, a specialized part of the brainstem
that is among a group of structures called the limbic
system. The limbic system controls human emotions
through its connections to glands and muscles; it also
connects to the ANS and ‘‘higher’’ brain centers, such
as parts of the cerebral cortex. One problem with this
arrangement is that the limbic system cannot tell the
difference between a realistic physical threat and an
anxiety-producing thought or idea. The hypothalamus
may trigger the release of stress hormones by the
pituitary gland, even when there is no external and
objective danger. A second problem is caused by the
biochemical side effects of too many ‘‘false alarms’’ in
the ANS. When a person responds to a real danger,
his or her body gets rid of the stress hormones by
running away or by fighting. In modern life, however,
people often have fight-or-flight reactions in situations
in which they can neither run away nor lash out
physically. As a result, their bodies have to absorb all
the biochemical changes of hyperarousal, rather
than release them. These biochemical changes can
produce anxious feelings, as well as muscle tension
and other physical symptoms associated with anxiety.
They may even produce permanent changes in the
brain, if the process occurs repeatedly. Moreover,
chronic physical disorders, such as coronary artery
disease, may be worsened by anxiety, as chronic
hyperarousal puts undue stress on the heart, stomach,
and other organs.
DISEASES AND DISORDERS. Anxiety can be a symptom of certain medical conditions. Some of these diseases are disorders of the endocrine system, such as
Cushing’s syndrome (overproduction of cortisol by
the adrenal cortex), and include over- or underactivity
of the thyroid gland. Other medical conditions that
can produce anxiety include respiratory distress syndrome, mitral valve prolapse, porphyria, and chest
pain caused by inadequate blood supply to the heart
(angina pectoris).
A study released in 2004 showed that people who
had experienced traumatic bone injuries may have
unrecognized anxiety in the form of post-traumatic
stress disorder. This disorder can result from witnessing or experiencing an event involving serious injury,
or threatened death (or experiencing the death or
threatened death of another.)
MEDICATIONS AND SUBSTANCE USE. Numerous
medications may cause anxiety-like symptoms as a
side effect. They include birth control pills; some thyroid or asthma drugs; some psychotropic agents;
occasionally, local anesthetics; corticosteroids; antihypertensive drugs; and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (like flurbiprofen and ibuprofen).
Although people do not usually think of caffeine as
a drug, it can cause anxiety-like symptoms when consumed in sufficient quantity. Patients who consume caffeine rich foods and beverages, such as chocolate, cocoa,
coffee, tea, or carbonated soft drinks (especially cola
beverages), can sometimes lower their anxiety symptoms
simply by reducing their intake of these substances.
Withdrawal from certain prescription drugs,
primarily beta blockers and corticosteroids, can
cause anxiety. Withdrawal from drugs of abuse,
including LSD, cocaine, alcohol, and opiates, can
also cause anxiety.
Learned associations
Some aspects of anxiety appear to be unavoidable
byproducts of the human developmental process.
Humans are unique among animals in that they
spend an unusually long period of early life in a relatively helpless condition, and a sense of helplessness
can lead to anxiety. The extended period of human
dependency on adults means that people may remember, and learn to anticipate, frightening or upsetting
experiences long before they are capable enough to feel
a sense of mastery over their environment. In addition,
the fact that anxiety disorders often run in families
indicates that children can learn unhealthy attitudes
and behaviors from parents, as well as healthy ones.
Also, recurrent disorders in families may indicate that
there is a genetic or inherited component in some
anxiety disorders. For example, there has been found
to be a higher rate of anxiety disorders (panic) in
identical twins than in fraternal twins.
CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT AND ANXIETY.
Researchers in early childhood development regard
anxiety in adult life as a residue of childhood memories of dependency. Humans learn during the first
year of life that they are not self-sufficient and that
their basic survival depends on the care of others. It is
thought that this early experience of helplessness
underlies the most common anxieties of adult life,
including fear of powerlessness and fear of being
unloved. Thus, adults can be made anxious by symbolic threats to their sense of competence and/or
significant relationships, even though they are no
longer helpless children.
 SYMBOLIZATION. The psychoanalytic model gives
considerable weight to the symbolic aspect of human
anxiety; examples include phobic disorders, obsessions,
compulsions, and other forms of anxiety that are highly
individualized. The length of the human maturation
process allows many opportunities for children and
adolescents to connect their experiences with certain
objects or events that can bring back feelings in later
life. For example, a person who was frightened as a child
by a tall man wearing glasses may feel panicky years
later by something that reminds him of that person or
experience without consciously knowing why.
Freud thought that anxiety results from a person’s internal conflicts. According to his theory,
people feel anxious when they feel torn between
desires or urges toward certain actions, on the one
hand, and moral restrictions, on the other. In some
cases, the person’s anxiety may attach itself to an
object that represents the inner conflict. For example, someone who feels anxious around money may
be pulled between a desire to steal and the belief that
stealing is wrong. Money becomes a symbol for the
inner conflict between doing what is considered right
and doing what one wants.
 PHOBIAS. Phobias are a special type of anxiety
reaction in which the person’s anxiety is concentrated
on a specific object or situation that the person then
tries to avoid. In most cases, the person’s fear is out of
all proportion to its ‘‘cause.’’ Prior to the Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th edition
(DSM-IV), these specific phobias were called simple
phobias. It is estimated that 10-11% of the population
will develop a phobia in the course of their lives. Some
phobias, such as agoraphobia (fear of open spaces),
claustrophobia (fear of small or confined spaces), and
social phobia, are shared by large numbers of people.
Others are less common or unique to the patient.
Social and environmental stressors
Anxiety often has a social dimension because
humans are social creatures. People frequently report
feelings of high anxiety when they anticipate and,
therefore, fear the loss of social approval or love.
Social phobia is a specific anxiety disorder that is
marked by high levels of anxiety or fear of embarrassment in social situations.
Another social stressor is prejudice. People who
belong to groups that are targets of bias are at higher
risk for developing anxiety disorders. Some experts
think, for example, that the higher rates of phobias
and panic disorder among women reflects their greater
social and economic vulnerability.
Some controversial studies indicate that the
increase in violent or upsetting pictures and stories in
news reports and entertainment may raise the anxiety
level of many people. Stress and anxiety management
programs often suggest that patients cut down their
exposure to upsetting stimuli.
Anxiety may also be caused by environmental or
occupational factors. People who must live or work
around sudden or loud noises, bright or flashing lights,
chemical vapors, or similar nuisances, which they cannot
avoid or control, may develop heightened anxiety levels.
Existential anxiety
Another factor that shapes human experiences of
anxiety is knowledge of personal mortality. Humans are
the only animals that appear to be aware of their limited
life span. Some researchers think that awareness of
death influences experiences of anxiety from the time
that a person is old enough to understand death.
Symptoms of anxiety
In order to understand the diagnosis and treatment of anxiety, it is helpful to have a basic understanding of its symptoms.
SOMATIC. The somatic or physical symptoms of
anxiety include headaches, dizziness or lightheadedness, nausea and/or vomiting, diarrhea, tingling, pale
complexion, sweating, numbness, difficulty in breathing, and sensations of tightness in the chest, neck,
shoulders, or hands. These symptoms are produced
by the hormonal, muscular, and cardiovascular reactions involved in the fight-or-flight reaction. Children
and adolescents with generalized anxiety disordershow
a high percentage of physical complaints.
BEHAVIORAL. Behavioral symptoms of anxiety
include pacing, trembling, general restlessness, hyperventilation, pressured speech, hand wringing, or finger
tapping.
COGNITIVE. Cognitive symptoms of anxiety
include recurrent or obsessive thoughts, feelings of
doom, morbid or fear-inducing thoughts or ideas,
and confusion, or inability to concentrate.
EMOTIONAL. Feeling states associated with anxiety include tension or nervousness, feeling ‘‘hyper’’ or
‘‘keyed up,’’ and feelings of unreality, panic, or terror.
DEFENSE MECHANISMS. In psychoanalytic theory,
the symptoms of anxiety in humans may arise from or
activate a number of unconscious defense mechanisms. Because of these defenses, it is possible for a
person to be anxious without being consciously
aware of it or appearing anxious to others. These
psychological defenses include:
 Repression. The person pushes anxious thoughts or
ideas out of conscious awareness.
 Displacement. Anxiety from one source is attached
to a different object or event. Phobias are an example
of the mechanism of displacement in psychoanalytic
theory.
 Rationalization. The person justifies the anxious
feelings by saying that any normal person would
feel anxious in their situation.
 Somatization. The anxiety emerges in the form of
physical complaints and illnesses, such as recurrent
headaches, stomach upsets, or muscle and joint pain.
 Delusion formation. The person converts anxious
feelings into conspiracy theories or similar ideas
without reality testing. Delusion formation can
involve groups as well as individuals.
Other theorists attribute some drug addiction to the
desire to relieve symptoms of anxiety. Most addictions,
they argue, originate in the use of mood-altering substances or behaviors to ‘‘medicate’’ anxious feelings.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of anxiety is difficult and complex
because of the variety of its causes and the highly
personalized and individualized nature of its symptom
formation. There are no medical tests that can be used
to diagnose anxiety by itself. When a doctor examines
an anxious patient, he or she will first rule out physical
conditions and diseases that have anxiety as a symptom. Apart from these exclusions, the physical examination is usually inconclusive. Some anxious patients
may have their blood pressure or pulse rate affected by
anxiety, or may look pale or perspire heavily, but
others may appear physically completely normal.
The doctor will then take the patient’s medication,
dietary, and occupational history to see if they are
taking prescription drugs that might cause anxiety, if
they are abusing alcohol or mood-altering drugs,
if they are consuming large amounts of caffeine, or if
their workplace is noisy or dangerous. In most cases,
the most important source of diagnostic information is
the patient’s psychological and social history. The
doctor may administer a brief psychological test to
help evaluate the intensity of the patient’s anxiety and
some of its features. Some tests that are often given
include the Hamilton Anxiety Scale and the Anxiety
Disorders Interview Schedule (ADIS). Many doctors
will check a number of chemical factors in the blood,
such as the level of thyroid hormone and blood sugar.
Treatment
Not all patients with anxiety require treatment,
but for more severe cases, treatment is recommended.
Because anxiety often has more than one cause and is
experienced in highly individual ways, its treatment
usually requires more than one type of therapy. In
addition, there is no way to tell in advance how
patients will respond to a specific drug or therapy.
Sometimes the doctor will need to try different medications or methods of treatment before finding the
best combination for the particular patient. It usually
takes about six to eight weeks for the doctor to evaluate the effectiveness of a treatment regimen.
Medications
Medications are often prescribed to relieve the
physical and psychological symptoms of anxiety.
Most agents work by counteracting the biochemical
and muscular changes involved in the fight-or-flight
reaction. Some work directly on the chemicals in the
brain that are thought to underlie the anxiety.
ANXIOLYTICS. Anxiolytics are sometimes called
tranquilizers. Most anxiolytic drugs are either benzodiazepines or barbiturates. Barbiturates, once commonly used, are now rarely used in clinical practice.
Barbiturates work by slowing down the transmission
of nerve impulses from the brain to other parts
of the body. They include such drugs as phenobarbital
(Luminal) and pentobarbital (Nembutal). Benzodiazepines work by relaxing the skeletal muscles and
calming the limbic system. They include such drugs
as chlordiazepoxide (Librium) and diazepam
(Valium). Both barbiturates and benzodiazepines are
potentially habit-forming and may cause withdrawal
symptoms, but benzodiazepines are far less likely than
barbiturates to cause physical dependency. Both drugs
also increase the effects of alcohol and should never be
taken in combination with it.
Two other types of anxiolytic medications
include meprobamate (Equanil), which is now
rarely used, and buspirone (BuSpar), a new type
of anxiolytic that appears to work by increasing
the efficiency of the body’s own emotion-regulating
brain chemicals. Buspirone has several advantages
over other anxiolytics. It does not cause dependence problems, does not interact with alcohol,
and does not affect the patient’s ability to drive
or operate machinery. However, buspirone is not
effective against certain types of anxiety, such as
panic disorder.
ANTIDEPRESSANTS AND BETA-BLOCKERS. For some
anxiety disorders, such as obsessive-compulsive disorder and panic type anxiety, a type of drugs used to treat
depression, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs; such as Prozac and Paxil), are the treatment
of choice. A newer drug that has been shown as effective as Paxil is called escitalopram oxalate (Lexapro).
Because anxiety often coexists with symptoms of
depression, many doctors prescribe antidepressant
medications for anxious/depressed patients. While
SSRIs are more common, antidepressants are sometimes prescribed, including tricyclic antidepressants
such as imipramine (Tofranil) or monoamine oxidase
inhibitors (MAO inhibitors) such as phenelzine
(Nardil).
Beta-blockers are medications that work by
blocking the body’s reaction to the stress hormones
that are released during the fight-or-flight reaction.
They include drugs like propranolol (Inderal) or atenolol (Tenormin). Beta-blockers are sometimes given
to patients with post-traumatic anxiety symptoms.
More commonly, the beta-blockers are given to
patients with a mild form of social phobic anxiety,
such as fear of public speaking.
Psychotherapy
Most patients with anxiety will be given some
form of psychotherapy along with medications.
Many patients benefit from insight-oriented therapies,
which are designed to help them uncover unconscious
conflicts and defense mechanisms in order to understand how their symptoms developed. Patients who
are extremely anxious may benefit from supportive
psychotherapy, which aims at symptom reduction
rather than personality restructuring.
Two newer approaches that work well with
anxious patients are cognitive-behavioral therapy
(CBT), and relaxation training. In CBT, the patient
is taught to identify the thoughts and situations that
stimulate his or her anxiety, and to view them more
realistically. In the behavioral part of the program, the
patient is exposed to the anxiety-provoking object,
situation, or internal stimulus (like a rapid heart
beat) in gradual stages until he or she is desensitized
to it. Relaxation training, which is sometimes called
anxiety management training, includes breathing exercises and similar techniques intended to help the
patient prevent hyperventilation and relieve the muscle tension associated with the fight-or-flight reaction.
Both CBT and relaxation training can be used in
group therapy as well as individual treatment. In addition to CBT, support groups are often helpful to
anxious patients, because they provide a social network and lessen the embarrassment that often accompanies anxiety symptoms.
Psychosurgery
Surgery on the brain is very rarely recommended
for patients with anxiety; however, some patients with
severe cases of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)
have been helped by an operation on a part of
the brain that is involved in OCD. Normally, this
operation is attempted after all other treatments have
failed.
Alternative treatment
Alternative treatments for anxiety cover a variety
of approaches. Meditation and mindfulness training
are thought beneficial to patients with phobias and
panic disorder. Hydrotherapy is useful to some
anxious patients because it promotes general relaxation of the nervous system. Yoga, aikido, t’ai chi, and
dance therapy help patients work with the physical, as
well as the emotional, tensions that either promote
anxiety or are created by the anxiety.
Homeopathy and traditional Chinese medicine
approach anxiety as a symptom of a systemic disorder.
Homeopathic practitioners select a remedy based on
other associated symptoms and the patient’s general
constitution. Chinese medicine regards anxiety as a
blockage of qi, or vital force, inside the patient’s
body that is most likely to affect the lung and large
intestine meridian flow. The practitioner of Chinese
medicine chooses acupuncture point locations and/or
herbal therapy to move the qi and rebalance the entire
system in relation to the lung and large intestine.
Prognosis
The prognosis for resolution of anxiety depends
on the specific disorder and a wide variety of factors,
including the patient’s age, sex, general health, living
situation, belief system, social support network, and
responses to different anxiolytic medications and
forms of therapy.
Prevention
Humans have significant control over thoughts,
and, therefore, may learn ways of preventing anxiety
by changing irrational ideas and beliefs. Humans
also have some power over anxiety arising from
social and environmental conditions. Other forms
of anxiety, however, are built into the human organism and its life cycle, and cannot be prevented or
eliminated.