Definition
The anxiety disorders are a group of mental disturbances characterized by anxiety as a central or core
symptom. Although anxiety is a commonplace experience, not everyone who experiences it has an anxiety
disorder. Anxiety is associated with a wide range of
physical illnesses, medication side effects, and other
psychiatric disorders.
The revisions of the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) that took place
after 1980 brought major changes in the classification
of the anxiety disorders. Prior to 1980, psychiatrists
classified patients on the basis of a theory that defined
anxiety as the outcome of unconscious conflicts in the
patient’s mind. DSM-III (1980), DSM-III-R (1987),
and DSM-IV (1994) introduced and refined a new
classification that considered recent discoveries
about the biochemical and post-traumatic origins
of some types of anxiety. The present definitions
are based on the external and reported symptom
patterns of the disorders rather than on theories
about their origins.
Description
Anxiety disorders are the most common form of
mental disturbance in the United States population. It is
estimated that 28 million people suffer from an anxiety
disorder every year. These disorders are a serious problem for the entire society because of their interference
with patients’ work, schooling, and family life. They
also contribute to the high rates of alcohol and substance abuse in the United States. Anxiety disorders
are an additional problem for health professionals
because the physical symptoms of anxiety frequently
bring people to primary care doctors or emergency
rooms.
DSM-IV defines 12 types of anxiety disorders in
the adult population. They can be grouped under
seven headings:
Panic disorders with or without agoraphobia. The
chief characteristic of panic disorder is the occurrence
of panic attacks coupled with fear of their recurrence.
In clinical settings, agoraphobia is usually not a disorder byitself, but is typically associated with some
form of panic disorder. Patients with agoraphobia
are afraid of places or situations in which they might
have a panic attack and be unable to leave or to find
help. About 25% of patients with panic disorder
develop obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD).
 Phobias. These include specific phobias and social
phobia. A phobia is an intense irrational fear of a
specific object or situation that compels the patient
to avoid it. Some phobias concern activities or
objects that involve some risk (for example, flying
or driving) but many are focused on harmless animals or other objects. Social phobia involves a fear of
being humiliated, judged, or scrutinized. It manifests
itself as a fear of performing certain functions in the
presence of others, such as public speaking or using
public lavatories.
 Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). This disorder
is marked by unwanted, intrusive, persistent
thoughts or repetitive behaviors that reflect the
patient’s anxiety or attempts to control it. It affects
between 2-3% of the population and is much more
common than was previously thought.
 Stress disorders. These include post-traumatic stress
disorder (PTSD) and acute stress disorder. Stress
disorders are symptomatic reactions to traumatic
events in the patient’s life.
 Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD). GAD is the
most commonly diagnosed anxiety disorder and
occurs most frequently in young adults.
 Anxiety disorders due to known physical causes.
These include general medical conditions or substance abuse.
 Anxiety disorder not otherwise specified. This last
category is not a separate type of disorder, but is
included to cover symptoms that do not meet the
specific DSM-IV criteria for other anxiety disorders.
All DSM-IV anxiety disorder diagnoses include a
criterion of severity. The anxiety must be severe
enough to interfere significantly with the patient’s
occupational or educational functioning, social activities or close relationships, and other customary
activities.
The anxiety disorders vary widely in their frequency of occurrence in the general population, age
of onset, family patterns, and gender distribution. The
stress disorders and anxiety disorders caused by
medical conditions or substance abuse are less ageand gender-specific. Whereas OCD affects males and
females equally, GAD, panic disorder, and specific
phobias all affect women more frequently than men.
GAD and panic disorders are more likely to develop in
young adults, while phobias and OCD can begin in
childhood.
Anxiety disorders in children and adolescents
DSM-IV defines one anxiety disorder as specific
to children, namely, separation anxiety disorder. This
disorder is defined as anxiety regarding separation
from home or family that is excessive or inappropriate
for the child’s age. In some children, separation anxiety takes the form of school avoidance.
Children and adolescents can also be diagnosed
with panic disorder, phobias, generalized anxiety disorder, and the post-traumatic stress syndromes.
Causes and symptoms
The causes of anxiety include a variety of individual and general social factors, and may produce physical, cognitive, emotional, or behavioral symptoms.
The patient’s ethnic or cultural background may also
influence his or her vulnerability to certain forms of
anxiety. Genetic factors that lead to biochemical
abnormalities may also play a role.
Anxiety in children may be caused by suffering
from abuse, as well as by the factors that cause anxiety
in adults.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of anxiety disorders is complicated by
the variety of causes of anxiety and the range of disorders that may include anxiety as a symptom. Many
patients who suffer from anxiety disorders have features
or symptoms of more than one disorder. Patients whose
anxiety is accounted for by another psychic disorder,
such as schizophrenia or major depression, are not
diagnosed with an anxiety disorder. A doctor examining
an anxious patient will usually begin by ruling out diseases that are known to cause anxiety and then proceed
to take the patient’s medication history, in order to
exclude side effects of prescription drugs. Most doctors
will ask about caffeine consumption to see if the
patient’s dietary habits are a factor. The patient’s work
and family situation will also be discussed. Often, primary care physicians will exhaust resources looking for
medical causes for general patient complaints which
may indicate a physical illness. In 2004, the Anxiety
Disorders Association of American published guidelines to better aid physicians in diagnosing and managing generalized anxiety disorder. Laboratory tests for
blood sugar and thyroid function are also common.
Diagnostic testing for anxiety
There are no laboratory tests that can diagnose
anxiety, although the doctor may order some specific
tests to rule out disease conditions. Although there is
no psychiatric test that can provide definite diagnoses
of anxiety disorders, there are several short-answer
interviews or symptom inventories that doctors can
use to evaluate the intensity of a patient’s anxiety
and some of its associated features. These measures
include the Hamilton Anxiety Scale and the Anxiety
Disorders Interview Schedule (ADIS).
Treatment
For relatively mild anxiety disorders, psychotherapy alone may suffice. In general, doctors prefer to use
a combination of medications and psychotherapy with
more severely anxious patients. Most patients respond
better to a combination of treatment methods than to
either medications or psychotherapy in isolation.
Because of the variety of medications and treatment
approaches that are used to treat anxiety disorders, the
doctor cannot predict in advance which combination
will be most helpful to a specific patient. In many cases
the doctor will need to try a new medication or treatment over a six- to eight-week period in order to assess
its effectiveness. Treatment trials do not necessarily
mean that the patient cannot be helped or that the
doctor is incompetent.
Although anxiety disorders are not always easy to
diagnose, there are several reasons why it is important
for patients with severe anxiety symptoms to get help.
Anxiety doesn’t always go away by itself; it often
progresses to panic attacks, phobias, and episodes of
depression. Untreated anxiety disorders may eventually lead to a diagnosis of major depression, or
interfere with the patient’s education or ability to
keep a job. In addition, many anxious patients develop
addictions to drugs or alcohol when they try to ‘‘medicate’’ their symptoms. Moreover, since children learn
ways of coping with anxiety from their parents, adults
who get help for anxiety disorders are in a better
position to help their families cope with factors that
lead to anxiety than those who remain untreated.
Alternative treatment
Alternative treatments for anxiety cover a variety
of approaches. Meditation and mindfulness training
are thought beneficial to patients with phobias and
panic disorder. Hydrotherapy is useful to some
anxious patients because it promotes general relaxation of the nervous system. Yoga, aikido, t’ai chi, and
dance therapy help patients work with the physical, as
well as the emotional, tensions that either promote
anxiety or are created by the anxiety.
Homeopathy and traditional Chinese medicine
approach anxiety as a symptom of a systemic disorder.
Homeopathic practitioners select a remedy based on
other associated symptoms and the patient’s general
constitution. Chinese medicine regards anxiety as a
blockage of qi, or vital force, inside the patient’s
body that is most likely to affect the lung and large
intestine meridian flow. The practitioner of Chinese
medicine chooses acupuncture point locations and/or
herbal therapy to move the qi and rebalance the entire
system in relation to the lung and large intestine.
Prognosis
The prognosis for recovery depends on the specific disorder, the severity of the patient’s symptoms, the
specific causes of the anxiety, and the patient’s degree
of control over these causes.
Prevention
Anxiety is an unavoidable feature of human existence. However, humans have some power over their
reactions to anxiety-provoking events and situations.
Cognitive therapy and meditation or mindfulness
training appear to be beneficial in helping people
lower their long-term anxiety levels.