Definition
Aortic dissection is a rare, but potentially fatal,
condition in which blood passes through the inner
lining and between the layers of the aorta. The dissecting aorta usually does not burst, but has an abnormal
second channel within it.
Description
A defect in the inner lining of the aorta allows an
opening or tear to develop. The aorta is the main
artery of the body and is an area of high blood
pressure. When a defect develops, blood pressure can
force the tear to open and allow blood to pass through.
Since the blood is under pressure, it eventually splits
(dissecting) the middle layer of the blood vessel, creating a new channel for blood. The length of the channel
grows over time and can result in the closing off of
connection points to other arteries. This can lead to
heart attack, strokes, abdominal pain, and nerve
damage. Blood may leak from the dissection and collect in the chest an around the heart.
A second mechanism leading to aortic dissection
is medial hemorrhage. A medial hemorrhage occurs in
the middle layer of the blood vessel and spills through
the inner lining of the aorta wall. This opening then
allows blood from the aorta to enter the vessel wall
and begin a dissection. Approximately 2,000 cases of
aortic dissection occur yearly in the United States.
Causes and symptoms
Aortic dissection is caused by a deterioration of
the inner lining of the aorta. There are a number of
conditions that predispose a person to develop defects
of the inner lining, including high blood pressure,
Marfan’s disease, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, connective
tissue diseases, and defects of heart development
which begin during fetal development. A dissection
can also occur accidentally following insertion of a
catheter, trauma, or surgery. The main symptom is sudden, intense pain. The pain can be so intense as to
immobilize the patient and cause him to fall to the
ground. The pain is frequently felt in both the chest
and in the back, between the shoulder blades. The extent
of the pain is proportional to the length of the dissection.
Diagnosis
The pain experienced by the patient is the first
symptom of aortic dissection and is unique. The pain is
usually described by the patient as ‘‘tearing, ripping, or
stabbing.’’ This is in contrast to the pain associated with
heart attacks. The patient frequently has a reduced or
absent pulse in the extremities. A murmur may be heard
if the dissection is close to the heart. An enlarged aorta
will usually appear in the chest x rays and ultrasound
exams of most patients. The use of a blood dye in angiograms and/or CT scans (computed tomography scans)
will aid in diagnosing and visualizing the dissection.
Treatment
Because of the potentially fatal nature of aortic
dissection, patients are treated immediately. Drugs are
administered to reduce the blood pressure and heart
rate. If the dissection is small, drug therapy alone may
be used. In other cases, surgery is performed. In surgery, damaged sections of the aorta are removed and a
synthetic graft is often used to reconstruct the
damaged vessel.
Prognosis
Depending on the nature and extent of the dissection, death can occur within a few hours of the start of
a dissection. Approximately 75% of untreated people
die within two weeks of the start of a dissection. Of
those who are treated, 40% survive more than 10
years. Patients are usually given long term treatment
with drugs to reduce their blood pressure, even if they
have had surgery.