Definition
The aortic valve separates the left ventricle of the
heart (the heart’s largest pumping chamber) from the
aorta, the large artery that carries oxygen-rich blood out
of the left ventricle to the rest of the body. In aortic valve
insufficiency, the aortic valve becomes leaky, causing
blood to flow backwards into the left ventricle.
Description
Aortic valve insufficiency occurs when this
valve cannot properly close after blood that is leaving the heart’s left ventricle enters the aorta. With
each contraction of the heart more and more blood
flows back into the left ventricle, causing the ventricle to become overfilled. This larger-than-normal
amount of blood that collects in the left ventricle
puts pressure on the walls of the heart, causing the
heart muscle to increase in thickness (hypertrophy).
If this thickening continues, the heart can be permanently damaged.
Aortic valveinsufficiencyis also know as aortic valve
regurgitation because of the abnormal reversed flow of
blood leaking through the poorly functioning valve.
Causes and symptoms
The faulty working of the aortic valve can be
caused by a birth defect; by abnormal widening
of the aorta (which can be caused by very high blood
pressure and a variety of other less common conditions); by various diseases that cause large amounts of
swelling (inflammation) in different areas of the body,
like rheumatic fever; and, although rarely, by the sexually transmitted disease, syphilis.
About 75% of people with aortic valve insufficiency are men. Rheumatic (inflammatory) diseases
have been the main cause of this condition in both
men and women.
Aortic valve insufficiency can remain unnoticed
for 10 to 15 years. In cases of severe insufficiency a
person may notice a variety of symptoms, including an
uncomfortable pounding of the heart when lying
down, a very rapid or hard heart beat (palpitations),
shortness of breath, chest pain, and if untreated for
very long times, swelling of the liver, ankles, and belly.
Diagnosis
A poorly functioning or insufficient aortic valve
can be identified when a doctor listens to the heart
during a physical examination. A chest x ray, an electrocardiogram (ECG, an electrical printout of the heart
beats), as well as an echocardiogram (a test that uses
sound waves to create an image of the heart and its
valves), can further evaluate or confirm the condition.
Treatment
Aortic insufficiency is usually corrected by having
the defective valve surgically replaced. However, such
an operation is done in severe cases. Before the condition worsens, certain drugs can be used to help manage
this condition.
Drugs that remove water from the body, drugs
that lower blood pressure, and drugs that help the
heart beat more effectively can each be used for this
condition. Reducing the amount of salt in the diet also
helps lower the amount of fluid the body holds and can
help the heart to work more efficiently as well.
In cases of a severely malfunctioning valve that
has been untreated for a long time, surgery is the
treatment of choice, especially if the heart is not functioning normally. Human heart valves can be replaced
with man-made valves or with valves taken from pig
hearts.
Prognosis
Although drug treatment can help put off the need
for surgical valve replacement, it is important to
replace the faulty valve before the heart muscle itself
is damaged beyond recovery.