Definition
When aortic valve stenosis occurs, the aortic
valve, located between the aorta and left ventricle of
the heart, is narrower than normal size.
Description
A normal aortic valve, when open, allows the free
flow of blood from the left ventricle to the aorta. When
the valve narrows, as it does with stenosis, blood flow
is impeded. Because it is more difficult for blood
to flow through the valve, there is increased strain on
the heart. This can cause the left ventricle to enlarge
and malfunction, resulting in reduced blood supply to
the heart muscle and body, as well as fluid build up in
the lungs.
Cause and symptoms
Aortic valve stenosis can occur because of a birth
defect in the formation of the valve. Calcium deposits
may form on the valve with aging, causing the valve to
become stiff and narrow. Stenosis can also occur as a
result of rheumatic fever. Mild aortic stenosis may
produce no symptoms at all. The most common symptoms, depending on the severity of the disease, are
chest pain, blackouts, and difficulty breathing.
Diagnosis
Using a stethoscope, a physician may hear a murmur and other abnormal heart sounds. An ECG, also
called an electrocardiogram, records the electrical
activity of the heart. This technique and chest x ray
can show evidence that the left ventricle is enlarged.
An x ray can also reveal calcium deposits on the valve,
as well as congestion in the lungs. Echocardiography
can pick up thickening of the valve, heart size, and
whether or not the valve is working properly. This is
a procedure in which high frequency sound waves
harmlessly bounce off organs in the body. Cardiac
catheterization, in which a contrast dye is injected in
an artery using a catheter, is the key tool to confirm
stenosis and gauge its severity.
Treatment
Treatment depends on the symptoms and how
the heart’s function is affected. The valve can be
opened without surgery by using a balloon catheter,
but this is often a temporary solution. The procedure involves inserting a deflated balloon at the end
of a catheter through the arteries to the valve.
Inflating the balloon should widen the valve. In
severe stenosis, heart valve replacement is recommended, most often involving open-heart surgery.
The valve can be replaced with a mechanical valve,
a valve from a pig, or by moving the patient’s other
heart valve (pulmonary) into the position of the
aortic valve and then replacing the pulmonary
valve with an mechanical one. Anyone with aortic
stenosis needs to take antibiotics (amoxicillin, erythromycin, or clindamycin) before dental and some
other surgical procedures, to prevent a heart valve
infection.
Prognosis
The prognosis for aortic valve stenosis depends on
the severity of the disease. With surgical repair, the
disease is curable. Patients suffering mild stenosis can
usually lead a normal life; a minority of the patients
progress to severe disease. Anyone with moderate
stenosis should avoid vigorous physical activity.
Most of these patients end up suffering some kind of
coronary heart disease over a 10 year period. Because
it is a progressive disease, moderate and severe stenosis
will be treated ultimately with surgery. Severe disease,
if left untreated, leads to death within 2 to 4 years once
the symptoms start.
Prevention
There is no way to prevent aortic stenosis.