Definition
Aphasia is condition characterized by either partial or total loss of the ability to communicate verbally
or using written words. A person with aphasia may
have difficulty speaking, reading, writing, recognizing
the names of objects, or understanding what other
people have said. Aphasia is caused by a brain injury,
as may occur during a traumatic accident or when
the brain is deprived of oxygen during a stroke. It
may also be caused by a brain tumor, a disease such
as Alzheimer’s, or an infection, like encephalitis.
Aphasia may be temporary or permanent. Aphasia
does not include speech impediments caused by loss
of muscle control.
Description
To understand and use language effectively, an
individual draws upon word memory–stored information on what certain words mean, how to put them
together, and how and when to use them properly. For
a majority of people, these and other language functions are located in the left side (hemisphere) of the
brain. Damage to this side of the brain is most commonly linked to the development of aphasia.
Interestingly, however, left-handed people appear to
have language areas in both the left and right hemispheres of the brain and, as a result, may develop
aphasia from damage to either side of the brain.
Stroke is the most common cause of aphasia in the
United States. Approximately 500,000 individuals suffer strokes each year, and 20% of these individuals
develop some type of aphasia. Other causes of brain
damage include head injuries, brain tumors, and infection. About half of the people who show signs of aphasia have what is called temporary or transient aphasia
and recover completely within a few days. An estimated
one million Americans suffer from some form of permanent aphasia. As yet, no connection between aphasia
and age, gender, or race has been found.
Aphasia is sometimes confused with other conditions that affect speech, such as dysarthria and
apraxia. These condition affect the muscles used in
speaking rather than language function itself.
Dysarthria is a speech disturbance caused by lack of
control over the muscles used in speaking, perhaps due
to nerve damage. Speech apraxia is a speech disturbance in which language comprehension and muscle
control are retained, but the memory of how to use the
muscles to form words is not.
Causes and symptoms
Aphasia can develop after an individual sustains
a brain injury from a stroke, head trauma, tumor, or
infection, such as herpes encephalitis. As a result of
this injury, the pathways for language comprehension or production are disrupted or destroyed. For
most people, this means damage to the left hemisphere of the brain. (In 95 to 99% of right-handed
people, language centers are in the left hemisphere,
and up to 70% of left-handed people also have lefthemisphere language dominance.) According to the
traditional classification scheme, each form of
aphasia is caused by damage to a different part of
the left hemisphere of the brain. This damage affects
one or more of the basic language functions: speech,
naming (the ability to identify an object, color, or
other item with an appropriate word or term), repetition (the ability to repeat words, phrases, and sentences), hearing comprehension (the ability to
understand spoken language), reading (the ability
to understand written words and their meaning),
and writing (the ability to communicate and record
events with text).
The traditional classification scheme includes
eight types of aphasia:
 Broca’s aphasia, also called motor aphasia, results
from damage to the front portion or frontal lobe of
the language-dominant area of the brain. Individuals
with Broca’s aphasia may be completely unable to
use speech (mutism) or may be able to use singleword statements or even full sentences, though
these sentences may require a great deal of effort to
construct. Small words, such as conjunctions (and,
or, but) and articles (the, an, a), may be omitted,
leading to a ‘‘telegraph’’ quality in their speech.
Hearing comprehension is usually not affected, so
they are able to understand other people’s speech
and conversation and can follow commands. Often,
they may experience weakness on the right side of
their bodies, which can make it difficult to write.
Reading ability is impaired, and they may have difficulty finding the right word when speaking.
Individuals with Broca’s aphasia may become frustrated and depressed because they are aware of their
language difficulties.
 Wernicke’s aphasia is caused by damage to the side
portion or temporal lobe of the language-dominant
area of the brain. Individuals with Wernicke’s aphasia speak in long, uninterrupted sentences; however,
the words used are frequently unnecessary or even
made-up. They have a great deal of difficulty understanding other people’s speech, sometimes to the
point of being unable to understand spoken language
at all. Reading ability is diminished, and although
writing ability is retained, what is written may be
abnormal. No physical symptoms, such as the
right-sided weakness seen with Broca’s aphasia, are
typically observed. Also, in contrast to Broca’s aphasia, individuals with Wernicke’s aphasia are not
aware of their language errors.
 Global aphasia is caused by widespread damage to
the language areas of the left hemisphere. As a result,
all basic language functions are affected, but some
areas may be more affected than others. For example, an individual may have difficulty speaking but
may be able to write well. The individual may experience weakness and loss of feeling on the right side of
their body.
 Conduction aphasia, also called associative aphasia,
is rather uncommon. Individuals with conduction
aphasia are unable to repeat words, sentences, and
phrases. Speech is fairly unbroken, although individuals may frequently correct themselves and words
may be skipped or repeated. Although able to understand spoken language, it may also be difficult for the
individual with conduction aphasia to find the right
word to describe a person or object. The impact of
this condition on reading and writing ability varies.
As with other types of aphasia, right-sided weakness
or sensory loss may be present.
 Anomic or nominal aphasia primarily influences an
individual’s ability to find the right name for a person or object. As a result, an object may be described
rather than named. Hearing comprehension, repetition, reading, and writing are not affected, other than
by this inability to find the right name. Speech is
fluent, except for pauses as the individual tries to
recall the right name. Physical symptoms are variable, and some individuals have no symptoms of onesided weakness or sensory loss.
 Transcortical aphasia is caused by damage to the
language areas of the left hemisphere outside the
primary language areas. There are three types of
aphasia: transcortical motor aphasia, transcortical
sensory aphasia, and mixed transcortical aphasia.
All of the transcortical aphasias are distinguished
from other types by the individual’s ability to repeat
words, phrases, or sentences. Other language functions may also be impaired to varying degrees,
depending on the extent and particular location of
brain damage.
As researchers continue to learn more about the
brain’s structure and function, new types of aphasia
are being recognized. One newly recognized type of
aphasia, subcortical aphasia, mimics the symptoms
of other traditional types of aphasia but involves
language disorders that are not typical. This type of
aphasia is associated with injuries to areas of the brain
typically not identified with language and language
processing.
Diagnosis
Following brain injury, an initial bedside assessment is made to determine whether language function has been affected. If the individual experiences
difficulty communicating, attempts are made to
determine whether this difficulty arises from
impaired language comprehension or an impaired
ability to speak. A typical examination involves
listening to spontaneous speech and evaluating the
individual’s ability to recognize and name objects,
comprehend what is heard, and repeat sample words
and phrases. The individual may also be asked to
read text aloud and explain what the passage
means. In addition, writing ability is evaluated by
having the individual copy text, transcribe dictated
text, and write something without prompting.
A speech pathologist or neuropsychologist may
be asked to conduct more extensive examinations
using in-depth, standardized tests. Commonly used
tests include the Boston Diagnostic Aphasia
Examination, the Western Aphasia Battery, and possibly, the Porch Index of Speech Ability.
The results of these tests indicate the severity of
the aphasia and may also provide information regarding the exact location of the brain damage. This more
extensive testing is also designed to provide the information necessary to design an individualized speech
therapy program. Further information about the location of the damage is gained through the use of imaging technology, such as magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) and computed tomography scans (CT).
Treatment
Initially, the underlying cause of aphasia must be
treated or stabilized. To regain language function,
therapy must begin as soon as possible following the
injury. Although there are no medical or surgical procedures currently available to treat this condition,
aphasia resulting from stroke or head injury may
improve through the use of speech therapy. For most
individuals, however, the primary emphasis is placed
on making the most of retained language abilities and
learning to use other means of communication to
compensate for lost language abilities.
Speech therapy is tailored to meet individual
needs, but activities and tools that are frequently
used include the following:
 Exercise and practice. Weakened muscles are exercised by repetitively speaking certain words or making facial expressions, such as smiling.
 Picture cards. Pictures of everyday objects are used
to improve word recall and increase vocabulary. The
names of the objects may also be repetitively spoken
aloud as part of an exercise and practice routine.
 Picture boards. Pictures of everyday objects and
activities are placed together, and the individual
points to certain pictures to convey ideas and communicate with others.
 Workbooks. Reading and writing exercises are used
to sharpen word recall and regain reading and writing abilities. Hearing comprehension is also redeveloped using these exercises.
 Computers. Computer software can be used to
improve speech, reading, recall, and hearing comprehension by, for example, displaying pictures and
having the individual find the right word.
Prognosis
The degree to which an individual can recover
language abilities is highly dependent on how much
brain damage occurred and the location and cause of
the original brain injury. Other factors include the
individual’s age, general health, motivation and willingness to participate in speech therapy, and whether
the individual is left or right handed. Language areas
may be located in both the left and right hemispheres
in left-handed individuals. Left-handed individuals
are, therefore, more likely to develop aphasia following brain injury, but because they have two language
centers, may recover more fully because language abilities can be recovered from either side of the brain. The
intensity of therapy and the time between diagnosis
and the start of therapy may also affect the eventual
outcome.
Prevention
Because there is no way of knowing when a
stroke, traumatic head injury, or disease will occur,
very little can be done to prevent aphasia. The extent
of recovery, however, in some cases, can be affected
by an individual’s willingness to cooperate and participate in speech therapy directly following the injury.