Definition
Aplastic anemia is a disorder in which the bone
marrow greatly decreases or stops production of
blood cells.
Description
The bone marrow (soft tissue that is located
within the hard outer shell of the bones) is responsible
for the production of all types of blood cells. The
mature forms of these cells include red blood cells,
which carry oxygen throughout the body; white
blood cells, which fight infection; and platelets,
which are involved in clotting. In aplastic anemia,
the basic structure of the marrow becomes abnormal,
and those cells responsible for generating blood cells
(hematopoietic cells) are greatly decreased in number
or absent. These hematopoietic cells are replaced by
large quantities of fat.
Yearly, aplastic anemia strikes about 5-10 people
in every one million. Although aplastic anemia strikes
both males and females of all ages, there are two age
groups that have an increased risk. Both young adults
(between 15-30 years of age) and the elderly (over the
age of 60) have higher rates of aplastic anemia than the
general population. While the disorder occurs worldwide, young adults in Asia have a higher disease rate
than do populations in North America and Europe.
Causes and symptoms
Aplastic anemia falls into three basic categories,
based on the origin of its cause: idiopathic, acquired,
and hereditary.
In about 60% of cases, aplastic anemia is considered to be idiopathic, meaning that the cause of the
disorder is unknown.
Acquired aplastic anemia refers to those cases
where certain environmental factors and physical conditions seem to be associated with development of the
disease. Acquired aplastic anemia can be associated
with:
 exposure to drugs, especially anti-cancer agents,
antibiotics, anti-inflammatory agents, seizure
medications, and antithyroid drugs (drugs given to
stop the functioning of an overactive thyroid)
 exposure to radiation
 chemical exposure (especially to the organic solvent
benzene and certain insecticides)
 infection with certain viruses (especially those causing viral hepatitis, as well as Epstein-Barr virus, parvovirus, and HIV, the virus that can cause AIDS)
 pregnancy
 certain other disorders, including a disease called paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, an autoimmune
reaction called graft-vs-host disease (which occurs
when the body’s immune system attacks and destroys
the body’s own cells), and certain connective tissue
diseases
Hereditary aplastic anemia is relatively rare, but
occurs in Fanconi’s anemia, Shwachman-Diamond
syndrome, and dyskeratosis congenita.
Symptoms of aplastic anemia tend to be those of
other anemias, including fatigue, weakness, tiny reddish-purple marks (petechiae) on the skin (evidence of
pinpoint hemorrhages into the skin), evidence of abnormal bruising, and bleeding from the gums, nose, intestine, or vagina. The patient is likely to appear pale. If
the anemia progresses, decreased oxygen circulating in
the blood may lead to an increase in heart rate and the
sudden appearance of a new heart murmur.
Diagnosis
The blood count in aplastic anemia will reveal low
numbers of all formed blood cells. Red blood cells will
appear normal in size and coloration, but greatly
decreased in number. Cells called reticulocytes (very
young red blood cells, which are usually produced in
great numbers by the bone marrow in order to compensate for a severe anemia) will be very low in number. Platelets and white blood cells will also be
decreased in number, though normal in structure.
A sample of the patient’s bone marrow will need
to be removed by needle (usually from the hip bone)
and examined under a microscope. If aplastic anemia
is present, this examination will reveal very few or no
hematopoietic cells, and replacement with fat.
Treatment
The first step in the treatment of aplastic anemia
involves discontinuing exposure to any substance that
may be causing the disorder. Although it would seem
that blood transfusions would be helpful in this disease, in fact, they only serve as a temporary help, and
may complicate future attempts at bone marrow
transplantation.
The most successful treatment for aplastic anemia
is bone marrow transplantation. To do this, a marrow
donor (often a sibling) must be identified. There are a
number of tissue markers that must be examined to
determine whether a bone marrow donation is likely to
be compatible with the patient’s immune system.
Compatibility is necessary to avoid complications,
including the destruction of the donor marrow by the
patient’s own immune system.
Patients who cannot undergo bone marrow
transplant can be treated with a number of agents,
including antithymocyte globulin (ATG), cyclophosphamide, steroids, and cyclosporine. These agents
all have the potential to cause a number of troublesome side-effects and may have a success rate of only
60% to 80%. Still, even among those patients who
have a good response, many later suffer a relapse
(return) of aplastic anemia. Researchers are trying to
identify the molecules in certain stem cells that the
immune system targets in aplastic anemia.
Prognosis
Aplastic anemia is a life-threatening illness.
Without treatment, it will almost surely progress to
death. Survival depends on how severe the disease is at
diagnosis, which type of treatment a patient is eligible
for, and what kind of response their body has to that
treatment. The worst-prognosis type of aplastic anemia
is one associated with very low numbers of a particular
type of white blood cell. These patients have a high
chance of dying from overwhelming bacterial infections. In fact, 80% of all patients treated with blood
transfusions alone die within 18 months to two years.
Patients who undergo bone marrow transplantation
have a 60-90% chance of being cured of the disease.t