Definition
Appendicitis is an inflammation of the appendix,
which is the worm-shaped pouch attached to the
cecum, the beginning of the large intestine. The appendix has no known function in the body, but it can
become diseased. Appendicitis is a medical emergency,
and if it is left untreated the appendix may rupture and
cause a potentially fatal infection.
Description
Appendicitis is the most common abdominal
emergency found in children and young adults. One
person in 15 develops appendicitis in his or her lifetime. The incidence is highest among males aged
10-14, and among females aged 15-19. More males
than females develop appendicitis between puberty
and age 25. It is rare in the elderly and in children
under the age of two.
The hallmark symptom of appendicitis is increasingly severe abdominal pain. Since many different conditions can cause abdominal pain, an accurate
diagnosis of appendicitis can be difficult. A timely
diagnosis is important, however, because a delay can
result in perforation, or rupture, of the appendix.
When this happens, the infected contents of the appendix spill into the abdomen, potentially causing a serious infection of the abdomen called peritonitis.
Other conditions can have similar symptoms,
especially in women. These include pelvic inflammatory disease, ruptured ovarian follicles, ruptured ovarian cysts, tubal pregnancies, and endometriosis.
Various forms of stomach upset and bowel inflammation may also mimic appendicitis.
The treatment for acute (sudden, severe) appendicitis is an appendectomy, surgery to remove the appendix. Because of the potential for a life-threatening
ruptured appendix, persons suspected of having
appendicitis are often taken to surgery before the
diagnosis is certain.
Causes and symptoms
The causes of appendicitis are not well understood, but it is believed to occur as a result of one or
more of these factors: an obstruction within the
appendix, the development of an ulceration (an abnormal change in tissue accompanied by the death of
cells) within the appendix, and the invasion of
bacteria.
Under these conditions, bacteria may multiply
within the appendix. The appendix may become swollen and filled with pus (a fluid formed in infected tissue,
consisting of while blood cells and cellular debris), and
may eventually rupture. Signs of rupture include the
presence of symptoms for more than 24 hours, a fever, a
high white blood cell count, and a fast heart rate. Very
rarely, the inflammation and symptoms of appendicitis
may disappear but recur again later.
The distinguishing symptom of appendicitis is
pain beginning around or above the navel. The pain,
which may be severe or only achy and uncomfortable,
eventually moves into the right lower corner of the
abdomen. There, it becomes more steady and more
severe, and often increases with movement, coughing,
and so forth. The abdomen often becomes rigid and
tender to the touch. Increasing rigidity and tenderness
indicates an increased likelihood of perforation and
peritonitis.
Loss of appetite is very common. Nausea and
vomiting may occur in about half of the cases and
occasionally there may be constipation or diarrhea.
The temperature may be normal or slightly elevated.
The presence of a fever may indicate that the appendix
has ruptured.
Diagnosis
A careful examination is the best way to diagnose appendicitis. It is often difficult even for
experienced physicians to distinguish the symptoms
of appendicitis from those of other abdominal disorders. Therefore, very specific questioning and a
thorough physical examination are crucial. The
physician should ask questions, such as where the
pain is centered, whether the pain has shifted, and
where the pain began. The physician should press
on the abdomen to judge the location of the pain
and the degree of tenderness.
The typical sequence of symptoms is present in
about 50% of cases. In the other half of cases, less
typical patterns may be seen, especially in pregnant
women, older patients, and infants. In pregnant
women, appendicitis is easily masked by the frequent occurrence of mild abdominal pain and
nausea from other causes. Elderly patients may
feel less pain and tenderness than most patients,
thereby delaying diagnosis and treatment, and
leading to rupture in 30% of cases. Infants and
young children often have diarrhea, vomiting,
and fever in addition to pain.
While laboratory tests cannot establish the diagnosis, an increased white cell count may point to
appendicitis. Urinalysis may help to rule out a urinary
tract infection that can mimic appendicitis.
Patients whose symptoms and physical examination are compatible with a diagnosis of appendicitis
are usually taken immediately to surgery, where a
laparotomy (surgical exploration of the abdomen) is
done to confirm the diagnosis. In cases with a questionable diagnosis, other tests, such as a computed
tomography scan (CT) may be performed to avoid
unnecessary surgery. An ultrasound examination of
the abdomen may help to identify an inflamed appendix or other condition that would explain the symptoms. Abdominal x-rays are not of much value except
when the appendix has ruptured.
Often, the diagnosis is not certain until an operation is done. To avoid a ruptured appendix, surgery
may be recommended without delay if the symptoms
point clearly to appendicitis. If the symptoms are not
clear, surgery may be postponed until they progress
enough to confirm a diagnosis.
When appendicitis is strongly suspected in a
woman of child-bearing age, a diagnostic laparoscopy
(an examination of the interior of the abdomen) is
sometimes recommended before the appendectomy in
order to be sure that a gynecological problem, such as a
ruptured ovarian cyst, is not causing the pain. In this
procedure, a lighted viewing tube is inserted into the
abdomen through a small incision around the navel.
A normal appendix is discovered in about 10-20%
of patients who undergo laparotomy, because of suspected appendicitis. Sometimes the surgeon will
remove a normal appendix as a safeguard against
appendicitis in the future. During the surgery, another
specific cause for the pain and symptoms of appendicitis is found for about 30% of these patients.
Treatment
The treatment of appendicitis is an immediate
appendectomy. This may be done by opening the abdomen in the standard open appendectomy technique, or
through laparoscopy. In laparoscopy, a smaller incision
is made through the navel. Both methods can successfully accomplish the removal of the appendix. It is not
certain that laparoscopy holds any advantage over open
appendectomy. When the appendix has ruptured,
patients undergoing a laparoscopic appendectomy may
have to be switched to the open appendectomy procedure for the successful management of the rupture. If a
ruptured appendix is left untreated, the condition is fatal.
Prognosis
Appendicitis is usually treated successfully by
appendectomy. Unless there are complications, the
patient should recover without further problems. The
mortality rate in cases without complications is less
than 0.1%. When an appendix has ruptured, or a
severe infection has developed, the likelihood is higher
for complications, with slower recovery, or death from
disease. There are higher rates of perforation and
mortality among children and the elderly.
Prevention
Appendicitis is probably not preventable, although
there is some indication that a diet high in green vegetables and tomatoes may help prevent appendicitis.