Definition
Apraxia is neurological condition characterized
by loss of the ability to perform activities that a person
is physically able and willing to do.
Description
Apraxia is caused by brain damage related to
conditions such as head injury, stroke, brain tumor,
and Alzheimer’s disease. The damage affects the
brain’s ability to correctly signal instructions to the
body. Forms of apraxia include the inability to say
some words or make gestures.
Various conditions cause apraxia, and it can affect
people of all ages. A baby might be born with the
condition. A car accident or fall that resulted in head
trauma could lead to apraxia.
From 500,000 to 750,000 people need to be hospitalized each year for head injuries according to the
American Medical Association (AMA). Men between
the ages of 18 and 24 form the largest group of people
with head injuries. While not all severe injuries result
in apraxia, men in that age group are at risk.
Risk factors for strokes include high blood pressure, diabetes, and heart disease. Cigarette smoking
also puts a person at risk for a stroke. Brain tumors
are abnormal tissue growths in the skull. They may be
secondary tumors caused by the spread of cancer
through the body.
There is more than one type of apraxia, and a
person may have one or more form of this condition.
Furthermore, a milder form of apraxia is called
dyspraxia.
Causes and symptoms
Apraxia is caused by conditions that affect parts
of the brain that control movements. Apraxia is a
result of damage to the brain’s cerebral hemispheres.
These are the two halves of the cerebrum and are the
location of brain activities such as voluntary
movements.
Apraxia causes a lapse in carrying out movements
that a person knows how to do, is physically able to
perform, and wants to do. A person may be willing
and able to do something like bathe. However, the
brain does not send the signals that allow the person
to perform the necessary sequence of activities to do
this correctly.Types of apraxia
There are several types of apraxia, and a patient
could be diagnosed with one or more forms of this
condition. The types of apraxia include:
 Buccofacial or orofacial apraxia is the inability of a
person to follow through on commands involving
face and lip motions. These activities include coughing, licking the lips, whistling, and winking. Also
known as facial-oral apraxia, it is the most common
form of apraxia, according to the National Institute
of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS).
 Limb-kinetic apraxia is the inability to make precise
movements with an arm or leg.
 Ideomotor apraxia is the inability to make the proper
movement in response to a command to pantomime
an activity like waving.
 Constructional apraxia is the inability to copy, draw,
or build simple figures.
 Ideational apraxia is the inability to do an activity
that involves performing a series of movements in a
sequence. A person with this condition could have
trouble dressing, eating, or bathing. It is also known
as conceptual apraxia.
 Oculomotor apraxia is characterized by difficulty
moving the eyes.
 Verbal apraxia is a condition involving difficulty
coordinating mouth and speech movements. It is
referred to as apraxia of speech by organizations
including the American Speech Language Hearing
Association (ASHA).
A baby who does not coo or babble may display a
symptom of apraxia of speech, according to ASHA. A
young child may only say a few consonant sounds, and
an older child may have difficulty imitating speech. An
adult also has this difficulty. Other symptoms include
saying the wrong words. A person wants to say
‘‘kitchen,’’ but says ‘‘bipem’’ instead, according to an
ASHA report.
A person diagnosed with apraxia may also have
aphasia, a condition caused by damage to the brain’s
speech centers. This results in difficulty reading, witting, speaking, and understanding when others speak.
Post-apraxia changes
A person with apraxia could experience frustration about difficulty communicating or trouble performing tasks. In some cases, the condition could
affect the person’s ability to live independently.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of apraxia could begin with testing of
its underlying cause. Testing for conditions like a
stroke or cancer includes the MRI (magnetic resonance
imaging) and CT scanning (computer tomography
scanning). A brain biopsy is used to measure changes
caused by Alzheimer’s disease. In all cases, the physician takes a family history. Head trauma that could
cause apraxia is first treated in the emergency room.
Other diagnostic treatment is related to identifying the type of apraxia. For example, the physician
may ask the patient to demonstrate how to blow out a
candle, wave, use a fork, or use a toothbrush.
Assessment for speech apraxia in children
includes a hearing evaluation to determine if difficulty
in speaking is related to a hearing loss. If the condition
appears related to apraxia, a speech-language pathologist examines muscle development in the jaw, lips,
and tongue. The examination of adults and children
includes an evaluation of how words are pronounced
individually and in conversation. The pathologist
observes how the patient breathes when speaking
and the ability to perform actions like smiling.
The costs of diagnosis vary because the process
could include examinations and diagnostic screening
related to the underlying cost of the apraxia. Insurance
generally covers part of these costs.
Treatment
The treatment for apraxia usually involves rehabilitation through speech-language therapy, physical
therapy, or occupational therapy. In addition, treatment such as chemotherapy is administered for the
condition that caused the apraxia.
Family education is an important component of
apraxia treatment. The rehabilitation process takes
time, and relatives can offer encouragement and support
to the patient. They may be asked to help the patient
with in-home exercises. Furthermore, family members
sometimes need to take on the role of caregivers.
Speech-language therapy
Speech-language therapy focuses on helping the
patients learn or regain communication skills.
Therapists teach exercises to strengthen facial muscles
used in speech. Other exercises concentrate on patients
learning to correctly pronounce sounds and then turn
those sounds into words.
In cases where apraxia limits the ability to speak,
therapists help patients develop alternate means of
communication. These alternatives range from gesturing to using a portable computer that writes and produces speech, according to ASHA.
Occupational and physical therapies
Occupational and physical therapies focus on
helping patients regain the skills impaired by apraxia.
Physical therapy exercises concentrate on areas such
as mobility and balance. Occupational therapy helps
patients relearn daily living skills.
Treatment costs
The costs of therapy vary by the type of treatment,
regional location, and where the therapy is offered.
Fees can range for $40 per hour for in-office speech
therapy for a child to $85 per hour for in-home physical or occupational therapy for a senior citizen. Part of
therapy costs may be covered by insurance.
Alternative treatment
Most alternative treatments target Alzheimer’s
disease and other conditions that cause apraxia.
Herbal remedies thought to help people with
Alzheimer’s include ginkgo biloba, a plant extract.
However, organizations including the Alzheimer’s
Association caution that the effectiveness and safety
of this herbal remedy has not been evaluated by the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. The government
does not require a review of supplements like ginkgo.
Furthermore, there is a risk of internal bleeding if
ginkgo is taken in combination with aspirin and
blood-thinning medications.
Prognosis
The prognosis for apraxia depends on factors such
as what caused the condition. While Alzheimer’s is a
degenerative condition, a child with verbal apraxia or
a stroke patient could make progress.
In some cases, treatment helps a person to relearn
or acquire skills needed to function. A caregiver may
be required, and some people with dementia require
supervised, longterm care.
Prevention
The methods of preventing apraxia focus on preventing the underlying causes of this condition. This
may not be entirely possible when there is a family
history of conditions such as stroke, dementia, and
cancer. However, a person at risk by not smoking,
exercising, and eating a diet based on the American
Heart Association guidelines.
Head injury can be prevented by wearing a helmet
when participating in activities like sports and bicycling. Wearing a seatbelt when in a vehicle also helps
reduce the risk of head injury.