Definition
Encephalitis is a serious inflammation of the
brain, Arbovirus encephalitis is caused by a virus
from the Arbovirus group. The term arbovirus stands
for Arthro-pod-borne virus because these viruses are
passed to humans by members of the phylum
Arthropoda (which includes insects and spiders).
Description
Of the huge number of arboviruses known to
exist, about 80 types are responsible for human disease. In addition to the virus, there are usually two
other types of living creatures involved in the cycle
leading to human disease. When large quantities of
virus are present in an arthropod (often a tick or
mosquito), the viruses are passed to a bird or small
mammal when the arthropod attempts to feed on the
blood of that creature. The virus thrives within the
new host, sometimes causing illness, sometimes not.
More ticks or mosquitoes are infected with the virus
when they feed on the host’s blood. Eventually, a tick
or mosquito bites a human, and the virus is passed
along. Just a few types of arboviruses cycle only
between arthropods and humans, with no intermediate stop in a bird or small mammal.
Because the arboviruses require an arthropod to
pass them along to humans, the most common times
of year for these illnesses include summer and fall,
when mosquitoes and ticks are most prevalent.
Damp environments favor large populations of mosquitoes, and thus also increase the risk of arbovirus
infections.
The major causes of arbovirus encephalitis
include the members of the viral families alphavirus
(causing Eastern equine encephalitis, Western equine
encephalitis, and Venezuelan equine encephalitis), flavivirus (responsible for St. Louis encephalitis,
Japanese encephalitis, Tick-borne encephalitis,
Murray Valley encephalitis, Russian spring-summer
encephalitis, and Powassan), and bunyavirus (causing
California encephalitis).
In the United States, the most important types of
arbovirus encephalitis include Western equine encephalitis (WEE), Eastern equine encephalitis (EEE),
St. Louis encephalitis, and California encephalitis.
WEE strikes young infants in particular, with a 5%
chance of death from the illness. Of those who survive,
about 60% suffer permanent brain damage. EEE
strikes infants and children, with a 20% chance of
death, and a high rate of permanent brain damage
among survivors. St. Louis encephalitis tends to strike
adults older than 40 years of age, and older patients
tend to have higher rates of death and long-term disability from the infection. California virus primarily
strikes 5-18 year olds, with a lower degree of permanent brain damage.
Causes and symptoms
Encephalitis occurs because specific arboviruses
have biochemical characteristics which cause them to
be particularly attracted to the cells of the brain and the
nerves. The virus causes cell death and inflammation,
with fever and swelling within the brain and nerves. The
membranous coverings of the brain and spinal cord
(the meninges) may also become inflamed, a condition
called meningitis. The brain is swollen, and patches of
bleeding occur throughout the brain and spinal cord.
Patients with encephalitis suffer from headaches,
fever, nausea and vomiting, stiff neck, and sleepiness.
As the disease progresses, more severe symptoms
develop, including tremors, confusion, seizures,
coma, and paralysis. Loss of function occurs when
specific nerve areas are damaged and/or killed.
Diagnosis
Early in the disease, laboratory testing of blood
may reveal the presence of the arbovirus. The usual
technique used to verify the presence of arbovirus
involves injecting the patient’s blood into the brain
of a newborn mouse, then waiting to see if the mouse
develops encephalitis. Diagnosis is usually based on
the patient’s symptoms, history of tick or mosquito
bites, and knowledge that the patient has been in an
area known to harbor the arbovirus.Treatment
Treatment is mostly supportive, meaning it is
directed at improving the symptoms, but does not
shorten the course of the illness. The main concerns
of treatment involve lowering fever, treating pain,
avoiding dehydration or other chemical imbalances,
and decreasing swelling in the brain with steroids.
Prognosis
Prognosis depends on the particular type of arbovirus causing disease, and on the age and prior health
status of the patient. Death rates range all the way up
to 20% for arbovirus encephalitis, and the rates of
lifelong effects due to brain damage reach 60% for
some types of arboviruses.
Prevention
Prevention involves avoiding contact with
arthropods which carry these viruses. This means
wearing appropriate insect repellents, and dressing
properly in areas known to be infested. Insecticides
and the avoidance of collections of standing water
(which are good breeding ground for arthropods) is
also effective at decreasing arthropod populations.
There are immunizations available against EEE
and WEE. These have primarily been used to safeguard laboratory workers who have regular exposure
to these viruses.