Definition
Aromatherapy is the therapeutic use of plantderived, aromatic essential oils to promote physical
and psychological well-being. It is sometimes used in
combination with massage and other therapeutic techniques as part of a holistic treatment approach.
Purpose
Aromatherapy offers diverse physical and psychological benefits, depending on the essential oil or
oil combination and method of application used.
Some common medicinal properties of essential oils
used in aromatherapy include: analgesic, antimicrobial, antiseptic, anti-inflammatory, astringent, sedative, antispasmodic, expectorant, diuretic, and
sedative. Essential oils are used to treat a wide range
of symptoms and conditions, including, but not limited to, gastrointestinal discomfort, skin conditions,
menstrual pain and irregularities, stress-related conditions, mood disorders, circulatory problems, respiratory infections, and wounds.
Description
Origins
Aromatic plants have been employed for their
healing, preservative, and pleasurable qualities
throughout recorded history in both the East and
West. As early as 1500 B.C. the ancient Egyptians
used waters, oils, incense, resins, and ointments
scented with botanicals for their religious ceremonies.
There is evidence that the Chinese may have
recognized the benefits of herbal and aromatic remedies much earlier than this. The oldest known herbal
text, Shen Nung’s Pen Ts’ao (c. 2700-3000 B.C.) catalogs over 200 botanicals. Ayurveda, a practice of traditional Indian medicine that dates back over 2,500
years, also used aromatic herbs for treatment.
The Romans were well-known for their use of
fragrances. They bathed with botanicals and integrated
them into their state and religious rituals. So did the
Greeks, with a growing awareness of the medicinal
properties of herbs, as well. Greek physician and surgeon Pedanios Dioscorides, whose renown herbal text
De Materia Medica (60 A.D.) was the standard textbook
for Western medicine for 1,500 years, wrote extensively
on the medicinal value of botanical aromatics. The
Medica contained detailed information on over 500
plants and 4,740 separate medicinal uses for them,
including an entire section on aromatics.
Written records of herbal distillation are found as
early as the first century A.D., and around 1000 A.D.,
the noted Arab physician and naturalist Avicenna
described the distillation of rose oil from rose petals,
and the medicinal properties of essential oils in his
writings. However, it wasn’t until 1937, when French
chemist Rene´-Maurice Gattefosse´ published
Aromatherapie: Les Huiles essentielles, hormones ve´ge´
tales, that aromatherapie, or aromatherapy, was
introduced in Europe as a medical discipline.
Gattefosse´, who was employed by a French perfumeur, discovered the healing properties of lavender
oil quite by accident when he suffered a severe burn
while working and used the closest available liquid,
lavender oil, to soak it in.
In the late 20th century, French physician Jean
Valnet used botanical aromatics as a front line
treatment for wounded soldiers in World War II. He
wrote about his use of essential oils and their healing
and antiseptic properties, in his 1964 book
Aromatherapie, traitement des maladies par les essences
des plantes, which popularized the use of essential oils
for medical and psychiatric treatment throughout
France. Later, French biochemist Mauguerite Maury
popularized the cosmetic benefits of essential oils, and
in 1977 Robert Tisserand wrote the first English language book on the subject, The Art of Aromatherapy,
which introduced massage as an adjunct treatment to
aromatherapy and sparked its popularity in the
United Kingdom.
In aromatherapy, essential oils are carefully
selected for their medicinal properties. As essential oils
are absorbed into the bloodstream through application
to the skin or inhalation, their active components trigger certain pharmalogical effects (e.g., pain relief ).
In addition to physical benefits, aromatherapy
has strong psychological benefits. The volatility of an
oil, or the speed at which it evaporates in open air, is
thought to be linked to the specific psychological effect
of an oil. As a rule of thumb, oils that evaporate
quickly are considered emotionally uplifting, while
slowly-evaporating oils are thought to have a calming
effect.
Essential oils commonly used in aromatherapy
treatment include:
 Roman chamomile (Chamaemelum nobilis). An antiinflammatory and analgesic. Useful in treating otitis
media (earache), skin conditions, menstrual pains,
and depression.
 Clary sage (Salvia sclarea). This natural astringent is
not only used to treat oily hair and skin, but is also
said to be useful in regulating the menstrual cycle,
improving mood, and controlling high blood pressure. Clary sage should not be used by pregnant
women.
 Lavender (Lavandula officinalis). A popular aromatherapy oil which mixes well with most essential
oils, lavender has a wide range of medicinal and
cosmetic applications, including treatment of insect
bites, burns, respiratory infections, intestinal discomfort, nausea, migraine, insomnia, depression, and
stress.
 Myrtle (Myrtus communis). Myrtle is a fungicide,
disinfectant, and antibacterial. It is often used in
steam aromatherapy treatments to alleviate the
symptoms of whooping cough, bronchitis, and other
respiratory infections.
 Neroli (bitter orange), (Citrus aurantium). Citrus oil
extracted from bitter orange flower and peel and
used to treat sore throat, insomnia, and stress and
anxiety-related conditions.
 Sweet orange (Citrus sinensis). An essential oil used
to treat stomach complaints and known for its
reported ability to lift the mood while relieving stress.
 Peppermint (Mentha piperita). Relaxes and soothes
the stomach muscles and gastrointestinal tract.
Peppermint’s actions as an anti-inflammatory, antiseptic, and antimicrobial also make it an effective
skin treatment, and useful in fighting cold and flu
symptoms.Rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis). Stimulating
essential oil used to treat muscular and rheumatic
complaints, as well as low blood pressure, gastrointestinal problems, and headaches.
 Tea tree (Melaleuca alternifolia). Has bactericidal,
virucidal, fungicidal, and anti-inflammatory properties that make it a good choice for fighting infection.
Recommended for treating sore throat and respiratory infections, vaginal and bladder infections,
wounds, and a variety of skin conditions.
 Ylang ylang (Cananga odorata). A sedative essential
oil sometimes used to treat hypertension and
tachycardia.
Essential oils contain active agents that can have
potent physical effects. While some basic aromatherapy home treatments can be self-administered, medical aromatherapy should always be performed under
the guidance of an aromatherapist, herbalist, massage
therapist, nurse, or physician.
Inhalation
The most basic method of administering aromatherapy is direct or indirect inhalation of essential
oils. Several drops of an essential oil can be applied
to a tissue or handkerchief and gently inhaled. A
small amount of essential oil can also be added to a
bowl of hot water and used as a steam treatment.
This technique is recommended when aromatherapy
is used to treat respiratory and/or skin conditions.
Aromatherapy steam devices are also available commercially. A warm bath containing essential oils can
have the same effect as steam aromatherapy, with
the added benefit of promoting relaxation. When
used in a bath, water should be lukewarm rather
than hot to slow the evaporation of the oil.
Essential oil diffusers, vaporizers, and light bulb
rings can be used to disperse essential oils over a large
area. These devices can be particularly effective in
aromatherapy that uses essential oils to promote a
healthier home environment. For example, eucalyptus
and tea tree oil are known for their antiseptic qualities
and are frequently used to disinfect sickrooms, and
citronella and geranium can be useful in repelling
insects.
Direct application
Because of their potency, essential oils are diluted
in a carrier oil or lotion before being applied to the
skin to prevent an allergic skin reaction. The carrier oil
can be a vegetable or olive based one, such as wheat
germ or avocado. Light oils, such as safflower, sweet
almond, grapeseed, hazelnut, apricot seed, or peach
kernel, may be absorbed more easily by the skin.
Standard dilutions of essential oils in carrier oils
range from 2–10%. However, some oils can be used
at higher concentrations, and others should be diluted
further for safe and effective use. The type of carrier
oil used and the therapeutic use of the application
may also influence how the essential oil is mixed.
Individuals should seek guidance from a healthcare
professional and/or aromatherapist when diluting
essential oils.
Massage is a common therapeutic technique
used in conjunction with aromatherapy to both
relax the body and thoroughly administer the essential oil treatment. Essential oils can also be used in
hot or cold compresses and soaks to treat muscle
aches and pains (e.g., lavender and ginger). As a
sore throat remedy, antiseptic and soothing essential
oils (e.g., tea tree and sage) can be thoroughly
mixed with water and used as a gargle or
mouthwash.
Internal use
Some essential oils can be administered internally
in tincture, infusion, or suppository form to treat certain symptoms or conditions; however, this treatment
should never be self-administered. Essential oils
should only be taken internally under the supervision
of a qualified healthcare professional.
As non-prescription botanical preparations, the
essential oils used in aromatherapy are typically not
paid for by health insurance. The self-administered
nature of the therapy controls costs to some degree.
Aromatherapy treatment sessions from a professional aromatherapist are not covered by health
insurance in most cases, although aromatherapy performed in conjunction with physical therapy, nursing, therapeutic massage, or other covered medical
services may be. Individuals should check with their
insurance provider to find out about their specific
coverage.
The adage ‘‘You get what you pay for’’ usually
applies when purchasing essential oils, as bargain oils
are often adulterated, diluted, or synthetic. Pure essential oils can be expensive; and the cost of an oil will
vary depending on its quality and availability.
Preparations
The method of extracting an essential oil varies by
plant type. Common methods include water or steam
distillation and cold pressing. Quality essential oils
should be unadulterated and extracted from pure
botanicals. Many aromatherapy oils on the market
are synthetic and/or diluted, contain solvents, or are
extracted from botanicals grown with pesticides or
herbicides. To ensure best results, essential oils should
be made from pure organic botanicals and labeled by
their full botanical name. Oils should always be stored
dark bottles out of direct light.
Before using essential oils on the skin, individuals should perform a skin patch test by applying
a small amount of the diluted oil behind the wrist
and covering it with a bandage or cloth for up to
12 hours. If redness or irritation occurs, the oil
should be diluted further and a second skin test
performed, or it should be avoided altogether.
Individuals should never apply undiluted essential
oils to the skin unless advised to do so by a trained
healthcare professional.
Precautions
Individuals should only take essential oils
internally under the guidance and close supervision
of a health-care professional. Some oils, such as
eucalyptus, wormwood, and sage, should never be
taken internally. Many essential oils are highly
toxic and should never be used at all in aromatherapy. These include (but are not limited to) bitter
almond, pennyroyal, mustard, sassafras, rue, and
mugwort.
Citrus-based essential oils, including bitter and
sweet orange, lime, lemon, grapefruit, and tangerine,
are phototoxic, and exposure to direct sunlight should
be avoided for at least four hours after their
application.
Other essential oils, such as cinnamon leaf,
black pepper, juniper, lemon, white camphor,
eucalyptus blue gum, ginger, peppermint, pine
needle, and thyme can be extremely irritating to
the skin if applied in high enough concentration
or without a carrier oil or lotion. Caution should
always be exercised when applying essential oils
topically. Individuals should never apply undiluted essential oils to the skin unless directed to
do so by a trained healthcare professional and/or
aromatherapist.
Individuals taking homeopathic remedies should
avoid black pepper, camphor, eucalyptus, and peppermint essential oils. These oils may act as a remedy
antidote to the homeopathic treatment.
Children should only receive aromatherapy treatment under the guidance of a trained aromatherapist
or healthcare professional. Some essential oils may not
be appropriate for treating children, or may require
additional dilution before use on children.
Certain essential oils should not be used by pregnant or nursing women or by people with specific illnesses or physical conditions. Individuals suffering
from any chronic or acute health condition should
inform their healthcare provider before starting treatment with any essential oil.
Asthmatic individuals should not use steam inhalation for aromatherapy, as it can aggravate their
condition.
Essential oils are flammable, and should be kept
away from heat sources.
Side effects
Side effects vary by the type of essential oil used.
Citrus-based essential oils can cause heightened sensitivity to sunlight. Essential oils may also cause contact
dermatitis, an allergic reaction characterized by redness and irritation. Anyone experiencing an allergic
reaction to an essential oil should discontinue its use
and contact their healthcare professional for further
guidance. Individuals should do a small skin patch test
with new essential oils before using them extensively
(see ‘‘Preparations’’ above).
Research and general acceptance
The antiseptic and bactericidal qualities of some
essential oils (such as tea tree and peppermint) and
their value in fighting infection has been detailed
extensively in both ancient and modern medical
literature.
Recent research in mainstream medical literature
has also shown that aromatherapy has a positive
psychological impact on patients, as well. Several
clinical studies involving both post-operative and
chronically ill subjects showed that massage with
essential oils can be helpful in improving emotional
well-being, and consequently, promoting the healing
process.
Today, the use of holistic aromatherapy is widely
accepted in Europe, particularly in Great Britain,
where it is commonly used in conjunction with massage as both a psychological and physiological healing
tool. In the United States, where aromatherapy is
often misunderstood as solely a cosmetic treatment,
the mainstream medical community has been slower
to accept it.