Definition
An embolus is a blood clot, bit of tissue or
tumor, gas bubble, or other foreign body that circulates in the blood stream until it becomes stuck in
a blood vessel.
Description
When a blood clot develops in an artery and
remains in place, it is called a thrombosis. If all or
part of the blockage breaks away and lodges in
another part of the artery, it is called an embolism.
Blockage of an artery in this manner can be the result
of a blood clot, fat cells, or an air bubble.
When an embolus blocks the flow of blood
in an artery, the tissues beyond the plug are
deprived of normal blood flow and oxygen. This
can cause severe damage and even death of the
tissues involved.
Emboli can affect any part of the body. The most
common sites are the legs and feet. When the brain is
affected, it is called a stroke. When the heart is
involved, it is called a heart attack or myocardial
infarction (MI).
Causes and symptoms
A common cause of embolus is when an artery
whose lining has become thickened or damaged,
usually with age, allows cholesterol to build up
more easily than normal on the artery wall. If
some of the cholesterol breaks off, it forms an
embolus. Emboli also commonly form from blood
clots in a heart that has been damaged from heart
attack or when the heart contracts abnormally from
atrial fibrillation.
Other known causes are fat cells that enter the
blood after a major bone fracture, infected blood
cells, cancer cells that enter the blood stream, and
small gas bubbles.
Symptoms of an embolus can begin suddenly or
build slowly over time, depending on the amount of
blocked blood flow.
If the embolus is in an arm or leg, there will be
muscle pain, numbness or tingling, pale skin color,
lower temperature in the limb, and weakness or loss
of muscle function. If it occurs in an internal organ,
there is usually pain and/or loss of the organ’s
function.
Diagnosis
The following tests can be used to confirm the
presence of an arterial embolism:
 Electrocardiogram, also known as an EKG or ECG.
For this test, patches that detect electrical impulses
from the heart are attached to the chest and extremities. The information is displayed on a monitor
screen or a paper tape in the form of waves.
Reduced blood and oxygen supply to the heart
shows as a change in the shape of the waves.
 Noninvasive vascular tests. These involve measuring
blood pressure in various parts of the body and
comparing the results from each location. When
there is a decrease in blood pressure beyond what is
normal between two points, a blockage is presumed
to be present.
 Angiography. In this procedure, a colored liquid
material (a dye, or contrast material) that can be
seen with x rays is injected into the blood stream
through a small tube called a catheter. As the dye
fills the arteries, they are easily seen on x ray motion
pictures. If there is a blockage in the artery, it shows
up as a sudden cut off in the movement of contrast
material. Angiography is an expensive procedure
and does carry some risk. The catheter may cause
a blood clot to form, blocking blood flow. There is
also the risk of poking the catheter through the artery
or heart muscle. Some people may be allergic to the
dye. The risk of any of these injuries occurring is
small.
Treatment
Arterial embolism can be treated with medication
or surgery, depending on the extent and location of the
blockage.
Medication to dissolve the clot is usually given
through a catheter directly into the affected artery. If
the embolus was caused by a blood clot, medications
that thin the blood will help reduce the risk of another
embolism.
A surgeon can remove an embolus by making an
incision in the artery above the blockage and, using a
catheter inserted past the embolus, drag it out through
the incision.
If the condition is severe, a surgeon may elect to
bypass the blocked vessel by grafting a new vessel in its
place.
Prognosis
An arterial embolism is serious and should be
treated promptly to avoid permanent damage to the
affected area. The outcome of any treatment depends
on the location and seriousness of the embolism. New
arterial emboli can form even after successful treatment of the first event.
Prevention
Prevention may include diet changes to reduce
cholesterol levels, medications to thin the blood, and
practicing an active, healthy lifestyle.