Definition
Arthroscopy is the examination of a joint, specifically, the inside structures. The procedure is performed
by inserting a specifically designed illuminated device
into the joint through a small incision. This instrument
is called an arthroscope. The procedure of arthroscopy
is primarily associated with the process of diagnosis.
However, when actual repair is performed, the procedure is called arthroscopic surgery.
Purpose
Arthroscopy is used primarily by doctors who
specialize in treating disorders of the bones and
related structures (orthopedics) to help diagnose
joint problems. Once described as essential for those
who primarily care for athletic injuries, arthroscopy
is now a technique commonly used by orthopedic
surgeons for the treatment of patients of all ages.
This procedure is most commonly used to diagnose
knee and shoulder problems, although the elbow,
hip, wrist, and ankle may also be examined with an
arthroscope.
A joint is a complex system. Within a joint, ligaments attach bones to other bones, tendons attach
muscles to bones, cartilage lines and helps protect the
ends of bones, and a special fluid (synovial fluid)
cushions and lubricates the structures. Looking inside
the joint allows the doctors to see exactly which structures are damaged. Arthroscopy also permits earlier
diagnosis of many types of joint problems which had
been difficult to detect in previous years.
Precautions
Most arthroscopic procedures today are performed in same-day surgery centers where the patient
is admitted just before surgery. A few hours following
the procedure, the patient is allowed to return home,
although usually someone else must drive. Depending
on the type of anesthesia used, the patient may be told
not to eat for several hours before arriving. Before the
procedure, the anesthesiologist will ask if the patient
has any known allergies to local or general anesthetics.
Airway obstruction is always possible in any patient
who receives a general anesthesia. Because of this,
oxygen, suction, and monitoring equipment must be
available. The patient’s cardiac status should always
be monitored in the event that any cardiac abnormalities arise during the arthroscopy.
Description
The arthroscope is an instrument used to look
directly into the joint. It contains magnifying lenses
and glass-coated fibers that send concentrated light
into the joint. A camera attached to the arthroscope
allows the surgeon to see a clear image of the joint.
This image is then transferred to a monitor located in
the operating room at the time of the arthroscopy.
This video technology is also important for documentation of the arthroscopic procedure. For example, if the surgeon decides after the arthroscopic
examination that a conventional approach to surgically expose or ‘‘open’’ the joint (arthrotomy) must
be used, a good photographic record will be useful
when the surgeon returns to execute the final surgical
plan.
The procedure requires the surgeon to make several small incisions (portals) through the skin’s surface
into the joint. Through one or two of the portals, a
large-bore needle, called a cannula, is attached to tubing and inserted into the joint. The joint is inflated
with a sterile saline solution to expand the joint and
ensure clear arthroscopic viewing. Often, following a
recent traumatic injury to a joint, the joint’s natural
fluid may be cloudy, making interior viewing of the
joint difficult. In this condition, a constant flow of the
saline solution is necessary. This inflow of saline solution may be through the cannula with the outflow
through the arthroscope, or the positions may be
reversed. The arthroscope is placed through one of
the portals to view and evaluate the condition of the
joint.
Preparation
Before an arthroscopy can take place, the surgeon
completes a thorough medical history and evaluation.
Important for the accuracy of this diagnostic
procedure, a medical history and evaluation may discover other disorders of the joint or body parts, proving the procedure unnecessary. This is always
an important preliminary step, because pain can
often be referred to a joint from another area of
the body. Anatomical models and pictures are
useful aids to explain to the patient the proposed
arthroscopy and what the surgeon may be looking at
specifically.
Proper draping of the body part is important to
prevent contamination from instruments used in
arthroscopy, such as the camera, light cords, and
inflow and outflow drains placed in the portals.
Draping packs used in arthroscopy include disposable
paper gowns and drapes with adhesive backing. The
surgeon may also place a tourniquet above the joint to
temporarily block blood flow to the area during the
arthroscopic exam.
General or local anesthesia may be used during
arthroscopy. Local anesthesia is usually used
because it reduces the risk of lung and heart complications and allows the patient to go home sooner.
The local anesthetic may be injected in small
amounts in multiple locations in skin and joint
tissues in a process called infiltration. In other
cases, the anesthetic is injected into the spinal cord
or a main nerve supplying the area. This process is
called a ‘‘block,’’ and it blocks all sensation below
the main trunk of the nerve. For example, a femoral
block anesthetizes the leg from the thigh down (its
name comes from femur, the thighbone). Most
patients are comfortable once the skin, muscles,
and other tissues around the joint are numbed by
the anesthetic; however, some patients are also
given a sedative if they express anxiety about the
procedure. (It’s important for the patient to remain
still during the arthroscopic examination.)
General anesthesia, in which the patient becomes
unconcious, may be used if the procedure may be
unusually complicated or painful. For example,
people who have relatively ‘‘tight’’ joints may be candidates for general anesthesia because the procedure
may take longer and cause more discomfort.
Aftercare
The portals are closed by small tape strips or
stitches and covered with dressings and a bandage.
The patient spends a short amount of time in the
recovery room after arthroscopy. Most patients can
go home after about an hour in the recovery room.
Pain medication may be prescribed for a short period;
however, many patients find various over-the-counter
pain relievers sufficient.
Following the surgical procedure, the patient
needs to be aware of the signs of infection, which
include redness, warmth, excessive pain, and swelling.
The risk of infection increases if the incisions become
wet too early following surgery. Because of this, it is
good practice to cover the joint with plastic (for example, a plastic bag) while showering after arthroscopy.
The use of crutches is commonplace after arthroscopy, with progression to independent walking on an
‘‘as tolerated’’ basis by the patient. Generally, a rehabilitation program, supervised by a physical therapist,
follows shortly after the arthroscopy to help the
patient regain mobility and strength of the affected
joint and limb.
Risks
The incidence of complications is low compared
to the high number of arthroscopic procedures performed every year. Possible complications include
infection, swelling, damage to the tissues in the joint,
blood clots in the leg veins (thrombophlebitis), leakage
of blood into the joint (hemarthrosis), blood clots that
move to the lung (pulmonary embolus), and injury to
the nerves around the joint.
Normal results
The goal of arthroscopy is to diagnose a joint
problem causing pain and/or restrictions in normal
joint function. For example, arthroscopy can be a
useful tool in locating a tear in the joint surface of
the knee or locating a torn ligament of the shoulder.
Arthroscopic examination is often followed by arthroscopic surgery performed to repair the problem with
appropriate arthroscopic tools. The final result is to
decrease pain, increase joint mobility, and thereby
improve the overall quality of the patient’s activities
of daily living.
Abnormal results
Less optimal results that may require further treatment include adhesive capsulitis. In this condition, the
joint capsule that naturally forms around the joint
becomes thickened, forming adhesions. This results in
a stiff and less mobile joint. This problem is frequently
corrected by manipulation and mobilization of the
joint with the patient placed under general anesthesia.
Resources