Definition
Arthroscopic surgery is a procedure to visualize,
diagnose, and treat joint problems. The name is
derived from the Greek words arthron, which means
joint, and skopein, which means to look at.
Purpose
Arthroscopic surgery is used to identify, monitor,
and diagnose joint injuries and disease; or to remove
bone or cartilage or repair tendons or ligaments.
Diagnostic arthroscopic surgery is performed when
medical history, physical exam, x rays, and other
tests such as MRIs or CTs don’t provide a definitive
diagnosis.Precautions
Diagnostic arthroscopic surgery should not be
performed unless conservative treatment does not fix
the problem.
Description
In arthroscopic surgery, an orthopedic surgeon
uses an arthroscope, a fiber-optic instrument, to see
the inside of a joint. After making an incision about
the size of a buttonhole in the patient’s skin, a sterile
sodium chloride solution is injected to distend the joint.
The arthroscope, an instrument the size of a pencil, is
then inserted into the joint. The arthroscope has a lens
and a lighting system through which the structures
inside the joint are transmitted to a miniature television
camera attached to the end of the arthroscope. The
surgeon uses irrigation and suction to remove blood
and debris from the joint before examining it. Other
incisions may be made in order to see other parts of the
joint or to insert additional instruments. Looking at the
interior of the joint on the television screen, the surgeon
can then determine the amount or type of injury and, if
necessary, take a biopsy specimen or repair or correct
the problem. Arthroscopic surgery can be used to
remove floating bits of cartilage and treat minor tears
and other disorders. When the procedure is finished,
the arthroscope is removed and the joint is irrigated.
The site of the incision is bandaged.
Arthroscopic surgery is used to diagnose and treat
joint problems, most commonly in the knee, but also
in the shoulder, elbow, ankle, wrist, and hip. Some of
the most common joint problems seen with an arthroscope are:
 inflammation in the knee, shoulder, elbow, wrist, or
ankle
 injuries to the shoulder (rotator cuff tendon tears,
impingement syndrome, and recurrent dislocations),
knee (cartilage tears, wearing down of or injury to the
cartilage cushion, and anterior cruciate ligament tears
with instability), and wrist (carpal tunnel syndrome)
 loose bodies of bone and/or cartilage in the knee,
shoulder, elbow, ankle, or wrist
Corrective arthroscopic surgery is performed with
instruments that are inserted through additional incisions. Arthritis can sometimes be treated with arthroscopic surgery. Some problems are treated with a
combination of arthroscopic and standard surgery.
Also called arthroscopy, the procedure is performed
in a hospital or outpatient surgical facility. The type of
anesthesia (local, spinal, or general) and the length of
the procedure depends on the joint operated on and the
complexity of the suspected problem. Arthroscopic surgery rarely takes more than an hour. Most patients who
have arthroscopic surgery are released that same day;
some patients stay in the hospital overnight.
Considered the most important orthopedic development in the 20th century, arthroscopic surgery is
widely used. The use of arthroscopic surgery on famous
athletes has been well publicized. It is estimated that
80% of orthopedic surgeons practice arthroscopic surgery. Arthroscopic surgery was initially a diagnostic
tool used prior to open surgery, but as better instruments and techniques were developed, it began to be
used to actually treat a variety of joint problems. New
techniques currently under development are likely to
lead to other joints being treated with arthroscopic
surgery in the future. Recently, lasers were introduced
in arthroscopic surgery and other new energy sources
are being explored. Lasers and electromagnetic radiation can repair rather than resect injuries and may be
more cost effective than instruments.
Preparation
Before the procedure, blood and urine studies and
x rays of the joint will be conducted.
Aftercare
Immediately after the procedure, the patient will
spend several hours in the recovery room. An ice pack
will be put on the joint that was operated on for up to
48 hours after the procedure. Pain medicine, prescription or non-prescription, will be given. The morning
after the surgery, the dressing can be removed and
replaced by adhesive strips. The patient should call
his/her doctor upon experiencing an increase in pain,
swelling, redness, drainage or bleeding at the site of the
surgery, signs of infection (headache, muscle aches,
dizziness, fever), or nausea or vomiting.
It takes several days for the puncture wounds
to heal, and several weeks for the joint to fully recover.
Many patients can resume their daily activities, including going back to work, within a few days of the
procedure. A rehabilitation program, including physical therapy, may be suggested to speed recovery and
improve the future functioning of the joint.
Risks
Complications are rare in arthroscopic surgery,
occurring in less than 1% of patients. These include
infection and inflammation, blood vessel clots, damage
to blood vessels or nerves, and instrument breakage.