Definition
Asbestosis is chronic, progressive inflammation of
the lung. It is not contagious.
Description
Asbestosis is a consequence of prolonged exposure to large quantities of asbestos, a material once
widely used in construction, insulation, and manufacturing. When asbestos is inhaled, fibers penetrate the
breathing passages and irritate, fill, inflame, and scar
lung tissue. In advanced asbestosis,, the lungs shrink,
stiffen, and become honeycombed (riddled with tiny
holes).
Legislation has reduced use of asbestos in the
United States, but workers who handle automobile
brake shoe linings, boiler insulation, ceiling acoustic
tiles, electrical equipment, and fire-resistant materials
are still exposed to the substance. Asbestos is used in
the production of paints and plastics. Significant
amounts can be released into the atmosphere when
old buildings or boats are razed or remodeled.
Asbestosis is most common in men over 40 who
have worked in asbestos-related occupations.
Smokers or heavy drinkers have the greatest risk of
developing this disease. Between 1968 and 1992,
more than 10,000 Americans over the age of 15 died
as a result of asbestosis. Nearly 25% of those who
died lived in California or New Jersey, and most of
them had worked in the construction or shipbuilding
trades.Causes and symptoms
Occupational exposure is the most common cause
of asbestosis, but the condition also strikes people who
inhale asbestos fiber or who are exposed to waste
products from plants near their homes. Family members can develop the disease as a result of inhaling
particles of asbestos dust that cling to workers’
clothes.
It is rare for asbestosis to develop in anyone who
hasn’t been exposed to large amounts of asbestos on a
regular basis for at least 10 years. Symptoms of the
disease do not usually appear until 15–20 years after
initial exposure to asbestos.
The first symptom of asbestosis is usually shortness of breath following exercise or other physical
activity. The early stages of the disease are also characterized by a dry cough and a generalized feeling of
illness.
As the disease progresses and lung damage
increases, shortness of breath occurs even when
the patient is at rest. Recurrent respiratory infections and coughing up blood are common. So is
swelling of the feet, ankles, or hands. Other symptoms of advanced asbestosis include chest pain,
hoarseness, and restless sleep. Patients who have
asbestosis often have clubbed (widened and thickened) fingers. Other potential complications
include heart failure, collapsed (deflated) lung,
and pleurisy (inflammation of the membrane that
protects the lung).
Diagnosis
Screening of at-risk workers can reveal lung
inflammation and lesions characteristic of asbestosis.
Patients’ medical histories can identify occupations,
hobbies, or other situations likely to involve exposure
to asbestos fibers.
X rays can show shadows or spots on the lungs
or an indistinct or shaggy outline of the heart that
suggests the presence of asbestosis. Blood tests are
used to measure concentrations of oxygen and carbon
dioxide. Pulmonary function tests can be used to
assess a patient’s ability to inhale and exhale, and a
computed tomography scan (CT) of the lungs can
show flat, raised patches associated with advanced
asbestosis.
Treatment
The goal of treatment is to help patients breathe
more easily, prevent colds and other respiratory infections, and control complications associated with
advanced disease. Ultrasonic, cool-mist humidifiers
or controlled coughing can loosen bronchial
secretions.
Regular exercise helps maintain and improve lung
capacity. Although temporary bed rest may be recommended, patients are encouraged to resume their regular activities as soon as they can.
Anyone who develops symptoms of asbestosis
should see a family physician or lung disease specialist.
A doctor should be notified if someone who has been
diagnosed with asbestosis:
 coughs up blood
 continues to lose weight
 is short of breath
 has chest pain
 develops a sudden fever of 1018F (38.38C) or higher
 develops unfamiliar, unexplained symptoms
Prognosis
Asbestosis can’t be cured, but its symptoms
can be controlled. Doctors don’t know why the
health of some patients deteriorates and the condition of others remain the same, but believe the
difference may be due to varying exposures of
asbestos. People with asbestosis who smoke, particularly those who smoke more than one pack of
cigarettes each day, are at increased risk for developing lung cancer and should be strongly advised
to quit smoking.
Prevention
Workers in asbestosis-related industries should
have regular x rays to determine whether their
lungs are healthy. A person whose lung x ray
shows a shadow should eliminate asbestos exposure even if no symptoms of the condition have
appeared.
Anyone who works with asbestos should wear a
protective mask or a hood with a clean-air supply and
obey recommended procedures to control asbestos
dust. Anyone who is at risk of developing asbestosis
should:
 not smoke
 be vaccinated against influenza and pneumonia
 exercise regularly to maintain cardiopulmonary
fitness
 avoid crowds and people who have respiratory
infections
A person who has asbestosis should exercise
regularly, relax, and conserve energy whenever
necessary.