Definition
Ascites is an abnormal accumulation of fluid in
the abdomen.
Description
Rapidly developing (acute) ascites can occur as a
complication of trauma, perforated ulcer, appendicitis, or inflammation of the colon or other tube-shaped
organ (diverticulitis). This condition can also develop
when intestinal fluids, bile, pancreatic juices, or bacteria
invade or inflame the smooth, transparent membrane
that lines the inside of the abdomen (peritoneum).
However, ascites is more often associated with liver
disease and other long-lasting (chronic) conditions.
Types of ascites
Cirrhosis, which is responsible for 80% of all
instances of ascities in the United States, triggers a
series of disease-producing changes that weaken the
kidney’s ability to excrete sodium in the urine.
Pancreatic ascites develops when a cyst that has
thick, fibrous walls (pseudocyst) bursts and permits
pancreatic juices to enter the abdominal cavity.
Chylous ascites has a milky appearance caused by
lymph that has leaked into the abdominal cavity.
Although chylous ascites is sometimes caused by
trauma, abdominal surgery, tuberculosis, or another
peritoneal infection, it is usually a symptom of lymphoma or some other cancer.
Cancer causes 10% of all instances of ascites in the
United States. It is most commonly a consequence of
disease that originates in the peritoneum (peritoneal
carcinomatosis) or of cancer that spreads (metastasizes) from another part of the body.
Endocrine and renal ascites are rare disorders.
Endocrine ascites, sometimes a symptom of an endocrine system disorder, also affects women who are
taking fertility drugs. Renal ascites develops when
blood levels of albumin dip below normal. Albumin
is the major protein in blood plasma. It functions to
keep fluid inside the blood vessels.
Causes and symptoms
Causes
The two most important factors in the production
of ascites due to chronic liver disease are:
Low levels of albumin in the blood that cause a
change in the pressure necessary to prevent fluid
exchange (osmotic pressure). This change in pressure
allows fluid to seep out of the blood vessels.
 An increase in the pressure within the branches of
the portal vein that run through liver (portal
hypertension). Portal hypertension is caused by
the scarring that occurs in cirrhosis. Blood that
cannot flow through the liver because of the
increased pressure leaks into the abdomen and
causes ascites.
Other conditions that contribute to ascites development include:
 hepatitis
 heart or kidney failure
 inflammation and fibrous hardening of the sac that
contains the heart (constrictive pericarditis)
Persons who have systemic lupus erythematosus
but do not have liver disease or portal hypertension
occasionally develop ascites. Depressed thyroid
activity sometimes causes pronounced ascites, but
inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis) rarely
causes significant accumulations of fluid.
Symptoms
Small amounts of fluid in the abdomen do not
usually produce symptoms. Massive accumulations
may cause:
 rapid weight gain
 abdominal discomfort and distention
 shortness of breath
 swollen ankles
Diagnosis
Skin stretches tightly across an abdomen that contains large amounts of fluid. The navel bulges or lies
flat, and the fluid makes a dull sound when the doctor
taps the abdomen. Ascitic fluid may cause the flanks
to bulge.
Physical examination generally enables doctors to
distinguish ascities from pregnancy, intestinal gas,
obesity, or ovarian tunors. Ultrasound or computed
tomography scans (CT) can detect even small amounts
of fluid. Laboratory analysis of fluid extracted by
inserting a needle through the abdominal wall (diagnostic paracentesis) can help identify the cause of the
accumulation.
Treatment
Reclining minimizes the amount of salt the kidneys absorb, so treatment generally starts with bed rest
and a low-salt diet. Urine-producing drugs (diuretics)
may be prescribed if initial treatment is ineffective.
The weight and urinary output of patients using diuretics must be carefully monitored for signs of :
 hypovolemia (massive loss of blood or fluid)
 azotemia (abnormally high blood levels of nitrogenbearing materials)
 potassium imbalance
 high sodium concentration. If the patient consumes
more salt than the kidneys excrete, increased doses of
diuretics should be prescribed
Moderate-to-severe accumulations of fluid are
treated by draining large amounts of fluid (largevolume paracentesis) from the patient’s abdomen.
This procedure is safer than diuretic therapy. It
causes fewer complications and requires a shorter
hospital stay.
Large-volume paracentesis is also the preferred
treatment for massive ascites. Diuretics are sometimes
used to prevent new fluid accumulations, and the procedure may be repeated periodically.
Alternative treatment
Dietary alterations, focused on reducing salt
intake, should be a part of the treatment. In less severe
cases, herbal diuretics like dandelion (Taraxacum officinale) can help eliminate excess fluid and provide
potassium. Potassium-rich foods like low-fat yogurt,
mackerel, cantaloupe, and baked potatoes help balance excess sodium intake.
Prognosis
The prognosis depends upon the condition that is
causing the ascites. Carcinomatous ascites has a very
bad prognosis. However, salt restriction and diuretics
can control ascites caused by liver disease in many cases.
Therapy should also be directed towards the
underlying disease that produces the ascites.
Cirrhosis should be treated by abstinence from alcohol
and appropriate diet. The new interferon agents
maybe helpful in treating chronic hepatitis.
Prevention
Modifying or restricting use of salt can prevent
most cases of recurrent ascites.