Definition
Aspergillosis refers to several forms of disease
caused by a fungus in the genus Aspergillus.
Aspergillosis fungal infections can occur in the ear
canal, eyes, nose, sinus cavities, and lungs. In some
individuals, the infection can even invade bone and the
membranes that enclose the brain and spinal cord
(meningitis).
Description
Aspergillosis is primarily an infection of the lungs
caused by the inhalation of airborne spores of the
fungus Aspergillus. Spores are the small particles that
most fungi use to reproduce. Although virtually everyone is exposed to this fungus in their daily environment, it rarely causes disease. When Aspergillus does
cause disease, however, it usually occurs in those
individuals with weakened immune systems (immunocompromised) or who have a history of respiratory
ailments. Because it does not present distinctive symptoms, aspergillosis is generally thought to be underdiagnosed and underreported. Furthermore, many
patients with the more severe forms of aspergillosis
tend to have multiple, complex health problems, such
as AIDS or a blood disorder like leukemia, which can
further complicate diagnosis and treatment.
Once considered particularly rare, the incidence of
reported aspergillosis has risen somewhat with the
development of more sophisticated methods of diagnosis and advances made in other areas of medicine,
such as with the increased use of certain chemotherapeutic and corticosteroid drugs that are extremely
useful in treating various types of cancer but that
decrease the individual’s immune response, making
them more susceptible to other diseases like
aspergillosis.
Our advanced ability to perform tissue and organ
transplants has also increased the number of people
vulnerable to fungal infections. Transplant recipients,
particularly those receiving bone marrow or heart
transplants, are highly susceptible to Aspergillus,
which may be circulating in the hospital air.
Aspergillosis can be a serious, potentially deadly
threat for two primary reasons:
 Aspergillosis usually occurs in those individuals who
are already ill or have weakened immune systems,
such as patients who have undergone chemotherapy
for cancer.
 None of the currently available antifungal drugs are
reliably effective against Aspergillus.
Causes and symptoms
Airborne Aspergillus spores enter the body primarily through inhalation but can also lodge in the
ear or eye. Normally functioning immune systems are
generally able to cope without consequent development of aspergillosis.
It is important to make distinctions between the
various forms of aspergillosis, as the treatment and
prognosis varies considerably among types.
Aspergillosis as a diagnosis refers to three general
forms:
 Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) is
seen in patients with long-standing asthma, particularly in patients taking oral corticosteroids for a long
period of time. This is usually the least serious and
most treatable form.
 Aspergilloma refers to the mass formed when fungal
spores settle into or colonize areas of the lung that
have been pitted and scarred as a result of tuberculosis or prior pneumonia. There are several available
treatments, although the success rate varies with each
treatment.
 Invasive fungal infection refers to rare cases in which
the fungus spreads throughout the body via the
blood stream and invades other organ systems.
Once established, invasive fungal infections are
extremely difficult to cure and, as a result, the associated death rate is extremely high.
Diagnosis
Aspergillosis can be quite difficult to diagnose
because the symptoms, such as coughing and wheezing,
if present at all, are common to many respiratory
disorders. Furthermore, blood and sputum cultures
are not very helpful. The presence of Aspergillus is
so common, even in asthmatics, that a positive culture
alone is insufficient for a diagnosis. Other, potentially
more useful, screening tools include examining the
sample obtained after repeatedly washing the bronchial
tubes of the lung with water (bronchial lavage), but
examining a tissue sample (biopsy) is the most reliable
diagnostic tool. Researchers are currently attempting
to develop a practical, specific, and rapid blood test
that would confirm Aspergillus infection.
Signs of ABPA include a worsening of bronchial
asthma accompanied by a low-grade fever. Brown flecks
or clumps may be seen in the sputum. Pulmonary
function tests may show decreased blood flow, suggesting an obstruction within the lungs. Elevated blood levels
of an antibody produced in response to Aspergillus and
of certain immune system cells may indicate a specific
allergic-type immune system response.
A fungal mass (aspergilloma) in the lung usually
does not produce clear symptoms and is generally diagnosed when seen on chest x rays. However, 70% or
more of patients spit up blood from the lungs (hemoptysis) at least once, and this may become repetitive and
serious. Hemoptysis, then, is another indication that
the patient may be suffering from an aspergilloma.
In patients with lowered immune systems who are
at risk for developing invasive aspergillosis, the physician may use a combination of blood culture with
visual diagnostic techniques, such as computed tomography scans (CT) and radiography, to arrive at a
likely diagnosis.
Treatment
The treatment method selected depends on the
form of aspergillosis. ABPA can usually be treated
with many of the same drugs used to treat asthma,
such as systemic steroids. Long-term therapy may be
required, however, to prevent recurrence. Antifungal
agents are not recommended in the treatment of
 ABPA. In cases of aspergilloma, it may become necessary to surgically remove or reduce the size of a fungal
mass, especially if the patient continues to spit up
blood. In aspergillosis cases affecting the nose and
nasal sinuses, surgery may also be required.
In non-ABPA cases, the use of antifungal drugs
may be indicated. In such cases, amphotericin B
(Fungizone) is the first-line therapy. The prescribed
dose will depend on the patient’s condition but usually
begins with a small test dose and then escalates. Less
than one-third of patients are likely to respond to
amphotericin B, and its side effects often limit its use.
For patients who do not respond to oral amphotericin
B, another option is a different formulation of the
same drug called liposomal amphotericin B.
For patients who fail to respond or who cannot
tolerate amphotericin B, another drug called itraconazole (Sporanox), given 400-600 mg daily, has also been
approved. Treatment generally lasts about 3 months.
Giving itraconazole can produce adverse reactions if
prescribed in combination with certain other drugs by
increasing the concentrations of both drugs in the
blood and creating a potentially life-threatening situation. Even antacids can significantly affect itraconazole levels. As a result, drug levels must be continually
monitored to ensure that absorption is occurring at
acceptable levels.
Two other methods of treatment are being
studied: direct instillation of an antifungal agent
into the lungs and administration of antifungals
using a nebulizer. Instilling or injecting amphotericin B or itraconazole directly into the lung cavity
or into the fungal ball (aspergilloma) itself has
been helpful in stopping episodes of hemoptysis,
but not in preventing future recurrences.
Furthermore, many patients with aspergillomas
are poor risks for surgery because their lung function is already compromised. As a result, instillation of a fungal agent should only be considered in
those who have significant hempotysis.
A popular method of treating some respiratory
disorders is to add a liquid drug to another carrier liquid
and aerosolize or produce a fine mist that can be inhaled
into the lungs through a device called a nebulizer.
However, this has not yet been shown to improve the
patient’s condition in cases of aspergillosis, possibly
because the drug is not reaching the aspergilloma.
At this point, preventative therapy for aspergillosis is not suggested for susceptible individuals, primarily because overuse of the drugs used to fight fungal
infections may lead to the development of drugresistant aspergillosis against which current antifungal
drugs are no longer effective.
Prognosis
The likelihood of recovery from aspergillosis
depends on any underlying medical conditions, the
patient’s general health, and the specific type of aspergillosis. If the problem is based on an allergic response,
as in ABPA, the patient will likely respond well to
systemic steroids.
Patients who require lung surgery, especially those
who have problems with coughing up blood, have a
mortality rate of about 7-14%, and complications or
recurrence may result in a higher overall death rate.
However, by treating aspergilloma with other, nonsurgical methods, that risk rises to 26%, making surgery a better option in some cases.
Unfortunately, the prognosis for the most serious
form, invasive aspergillosis, is quite poor, largely
because these patients have little resilience due to
their underlying disorders. Death rates have ranged
from about 50% in some studies to as high as 95% for
bone-marrow recipients and patients with AIDS. The
course of the illness can be rapid, resulting in death
within a few months of diagnosis.
Prevention
Fungal infection by Aspergillus presents a major
challenge, particularly in the patient with a suppressed
immune system (immunocompromised). Hospitals
and government health agencies continually seek
ways to minimize exposure for hospitalized patients.
Practical suggestions are minimal but include moving
leaf piles away from the house. Unfortunately, overall
avoidance of this fungus is all but impossible because
it is present in the environment virtually everywhere.
Research efforts are being directed at enhancing
patients’ resistance to Aspergillus rather than trying
to eliminate exposure to the fungus. Given the growing number of people with immune disorders or whose
immune systems have been suppressed in the course of
treating another disease, research and clinical trials
for new antifungal agents will be increasingly important in the future.