Definition
Asthma is a chronic (long-lasting) inflammatory
disease of the airways. In those susceptible to asthma,
this inflammation causes the airways to narrow periodically. This, in turn, produces wheezing and breathlessness, sometimes to the point where the patient
gasps for air. Obstruction to air flow either stops
spontaneously or responds to a wide range of treatments, but continuing inflammation makes the
airways hyper-responsive to stimuli such as cold air,
exercise, dust mites, pollutants in the air, and even
stress and anxiety.
Description
Between 17 million and 26 million Americans
have asthma, and the number seems to be increasing.
In about 1992, the number with asthma was about
10 million, and had risen 42% from 1982, just 10 years
prior. Not only is asthma becoming more frequent,
but it also is a more severe disease than before, despite
modern drug treatments. Asthma accounts for almost
500,000 hospitalizations, two million emergency
department visits, and 5,000 deaths in the United
States each year.
The changes that take place in the lungs of asthmatic persons makes the airways (the ‘‘breathing
tubes,’’ or bronchi and the smaller bronchioles) hyperreactive to many different types of stimuli that don’t
affect healthy lungs. In an asthma attack, the muscle
tissue in the walls of bronchi go into spasm, and the
cells lining the airways swell and secrete mucus into the
air spaces. Both these actions cause the bronchi to
become narrowed (bronchoconstriction). As a result,
an asthmatic person has to make a much greater effort
to breathe in air and to expel it.
Cells in the bronchial walls, called mast cells,
release certain substances that cause the bronchial
muscle to contract and stimulate mucus formation.
These substances, which include histamine and a
group of chemicals called leukotrienes, also bring
white blood cells into the area, which is a key part of
the inflammatory response. Many patients with
asthma are prone to react to such ‘‘foreign’’ substances as pollen, house dust mites, or animal dander;
these are called allergens. On the other hand, asthma
affects many patients who are not allergic in this way.
Asthma usually begins in childhood or adolescence, but it also may first appear during adult years.
While the symptoms may be similar, certain important
aspects of asthma are different in children and adults.
Child-onset asthma
Nearly one-third on the 17 to 26 million
Americans with asthma are children. When asthma
begins in childhood, it often does so in a child who is
likely, for genetic reasons, to become sensitized to
common allergens in the environment (atopic person).
When these children are exposed to house-dust mites,
animal proteins, fungi, or other potential allergens,
they produce a type of antibody that is intended to
engulf and destroy the foreign materials. This has the
effect of making the airway cells sensitive to particular
materials. Further exposure can lead rapidly to an
asthmatic response. This condition of atopy is present
in at least one-third and as many as one-half of the
general population. When an infant or young child
wheezes during viral infections, the presence of allergy
(in the child or a close relative) is a clue that asthma
may well continue throughout childhood.
Adult-onset asthma
Allergenic materials may also play a role when
adults become asthmatic. Asthma can actually start
at any age and in a wide variety of situations. Many
adults who are not allergic have conditions such as
sinusitis or nasal polyps, or they may be sensitive to
aspirin and related drugs. Another major source of
adult asthma is exposure at work to animal products,
certain forms of plastic, wood dust, or metals.
Causes and symptoms
In most cases, asthma is caused by inhaling an
allergen that sets off the chain of biochemical and
tissue changes leading to airway inflammation,
bronchoconstriction, and wheezing. Because avoiding
(or at least minimizing) exposure is the most effective
way of treating asthma, it is vital to identify which
allergen or irritant is causing symptoms in a particular
patient. Once asthma is present, symptoms can be set
off or made worse if the patient also has rhinitis
(inflammation of the lining of the nose) or sinusitis.
When, for some reason, stomach acid passes back up
the esophagus (acid reflux), this can also make asthma
worse. A viral infection of the respiratory tract can
also inflame an asthmatic reaction. Aspirin and a type
of drug called beta-blockers, often used to treat high
blood pressure, can also worsen the symptoms of
asthma.
The most important inhaled allergens giving rise
to attacks of asthma are:
 animal dander
 mites in house dust
 fungi (molds) that grow indoors
 cockroach allergens
 pollen
 occupational exposure to chemicals, fumes, or particles of industrial materials in the air
Inhaling tobacco smoke, either by smoking or
being near people who are smoking, can irritate the
airways and trigger an asthmatic attack. Air pollutants can have a similar effect. In addition, there are
three important factors that regularly produce attacks
in certain asthmatic patients, and they may sometimes
be the sole cause of symptoms. They are:
 inhaling cold air (cold-induced asthma)
 exercise-induced asthma (in certain children, asthma
is caused simply by exercising)
 stress or a high level of anxiety
 Wheezing is often obvious, but mild asthmatic
attacks may be confirmed when the physician listens
to the patient’s chest with a stethoscope. Besides
wheezing and being short of breath, the patient
may cough and may report a feeling of ‘‘tightness’’
in the chest. Children may have itching on their
back or neck at the start of an attack. Wheezing is
often loudest when the patient breathes out, in an
attempt to expel used air through the narrowed
airways. Some asthmatics are free of symptoms
most of the time but may occasionally be short of
breath for a brief time. Others spend much of their
days (and nights) coughing and wheezing, until
properly treated. Crying or even laughing may
bring on an attack. Severe episodes are often seen
when the patient gets a viral respiratory tract infection or is exposed to a heavy load of an allergen or
irritant. Asthmatic attacks may last only a few minutes or can go on for hours or even days (a condition called status asthmaticus).
Being short of breath may cause a patient to
become very anxious, sit upright, lean forward, and
use the muscles of the neck and chest wall to help
breathe. The patient may be able to say only a few
words at a time before stopping to take a breath.
Confusion and a bluish tint to the skin are clues
that the oxygen supply is much too low, and that
emergency treatment is needed. In a severe attack
that lasts for some time, some of the air sacs in the
lung may rupture so that air collects within the
chest. This makes it even harder to breathe in
enough air.
Diagnosis
Apart from listening to the patient’s chest, the
examiner should look for maximum chest expansion
while taking in air. Hunched shoulders and contracting neck muscles are other signs of narrowed airways.
Nasal polyps or increased amounts of nasal secretions
are often noted in asthmatic patients. Skin changes,
like atopic dermatitis or eczema, are a tipoff that the
patient has allergic problems.
Inquiring about a family history of asthma or
allergies can be a valuable indicator of asthma. The
diagnosis may be strongly suggested when typical
symptoms and signs are present. A test called spirometry measures how rapidly air is exhaled and how
much is retained in the lungs. Repeating the test after
the patient inhales a drug that widens the air passages
(a bronchodilator) will show whether the airway narrowing is reversible, which is a very typical finding in
asthma. Often patients use a related instrument, called
a peak flow meter, to keep track of asthma severity
when at home.
Often, it is difficult to determine what is triggering
asthma attacks. Allergy skin testing may be used,
although an allergic skin response does not always
mean that the allergen being tested is causing the
asthma. Also, the body’s immune system produces
antibody to fight off the allergen, and the amount of
antibody can be measured by a blood test. This will
show how sensitive the patient is to a particular allergen. If the diagnosis is still in doubt, the patient can
inhale a suspect allergen while using a spirometer to
detect airway narrowing. Spirometry can also be
repeated after a bout of exercise if exercise-induced
asthma is a possibility. A chest x ray will help rule
out other disorders.
Treatment
Patients should be periodically examined and
have their lung function measured by spirometry to
make sure that treatment goals are being met. These
goals are to prevent troublesome symptoms, to maintain lung function as close to normal as possible, and
to allow patients to pursue their normal activities
including those requiring exertion. The best drug therapy is that which controls asthmatic symptoms while
causing few or no side-effects.
Drugs
 METHYLXANTHINES. The chief methylxanthine
drug is theophylline. It may exert some anti-inflammatory effect, and is especially helpful in controlling
nighttime symptoms of asthma. When, for some reason, a patient cannot use an inhaler to maintain longterm control, sustained-release theophylline is a good
alternative. The blood levels of the drug must be measured periodically, as too high a dose can cause an
abnormal heart rhythm or convulsions.
BETA-RECEPTOR AGONISTS. These drugs, which
are bronchodilators, are the best choice for relieving
sudden attacks of asthma and for preventing attacks
from being triggered by exercise. Some agonists, such
as albuterol, act mainly in lung cells and have little
effect on other organs, such as the heart. These
drugs generally start acting within minutes, but
their effects last only four to six hours. Longer-acting
brochodilators have been developed. They may last
up to 12 hours. Bronchodilators may be taken in pill
or liquid form, but normally are used as inhalers,
which go directly to the lungs and result in fewer
side effects.
STEROIDS. These drugs, which resemble natural
body hormones, block inflammation and are extremely effective in relieving symptoms of asthma.
When steroids are taken by inhalation for a long
period, asthma attacks become less frequent as the
airways become less sensitive to allergens. This is
the strongest medicine for asthma, and can control
even severe cases over the long term and maintain
good lung function. Steroids can cause numerous
side-effects, however, including bleeding from the
stomach, loss of calcium from bones, cataracts in
the eye, and a diabetes-like state. Patients using
steroids for lengthy periods may also have problems
with wound healing, may gain weight, and may
suffer mental problems. In children, growth may
be slowed. Besides being inhaled, steroids may be
taken by mouth or injected, to rapidly control
severe asthma.
LEUKOTRIENE MODIFIERS. Leukotriene modifiers
(montelukast and zafirlukast) are a new type of
drug that can be used in place of steroids, for
older children or adults who have a mild degree of
asthma that persists. They work by counteracting
leukotrienes, which are substances released by white
blood cells in the lung that cause the air passages to
constrict and promote mucus secretion. Leukotriene
modifiers also fight off some forms of rhinitis, an
added bonus for people with asthma. However, they
are not proven effective in fighting seasonal
allergies.
OTHER DRUGS. Cromolyn and nedocromil are
anti-inflammatory drugs that are often used as
initial treatment to prevent asthmatic attacks over
the long term in children. They can also prevent
attacks when given before exercise or when exposure to an allergen cannot be avoided. These are
safe drugs but are expensive, and must be taken
regularly even if there are no symptoms. Anti-cholinergic drugs, such as atropine, are useful in controlling severe attacks when added to an inhaled
beta-receptor agonist. They help widen the airways
and suppress mucus production.
If a patient’s asthma is caused by an allergen that
cannot be avoided and it has been difficult to control
symptoms by drugs, immunotherapy may be worth
trying. Typically, increasing amounts of the allergen
are injected over a period of three to five years, so that
the body can build up an effective immune response.
There is a risk that this treatment may itself cause the
airways to become narrowed and bring on an asthmatic attack. Not all experts are enthusiastic about
immunotherapy, although some studies have shown
that it reduces asthmatic symptoms caused by
exposure to house-dust mites, ragweed pollen, and
cat dander.
Managing asthmatic attacks
A severe asthma attack should be treated as
quickly as possible. It is most important for a patient
suffering an acute attack to be given extra oxygen.
Rarely, it may be necessary to use a mechanical ventilator to help the patient breathe. A beta-receptor agonist is inhaled repeatedly or continuously. If the
patient does not respond promptly and completely, a
steroid is given. A course of steroid therapy, given
after the attack is over, will make a recurrence less
likely.
Maintaining control
Long-term asthma treatment is based on inhaling
a beta-receptor agonist using a special inhaler that
meters the dose. Patients must be instructed in proper
use of an inhaler to be sure that it will deliver the right
amount of drug. Once asthma has been controlled for
several weeks or months, it is worth trying to cut down
on drug treatment, but this must be done gradually.
The last drug added should be the first to be reduced.
Patients should be seen every one to six months,
depending on the frequency of attacks.
Starting treatment at home, rather than in a hospital, makes for minimal delay and helps the patient to
gain a sense of control over the disease. All patients
should be taught how to monitor their symptoms so
that they will know when an attack is starting, and
those with moderate or severe asthma should know
how to use a flow meter. They should also have a
written ‘‘action plan’’ to follow if symptoms suddenly
become worse, including how to adjust their medication and when to seek medical help. A 2004 report said
that a review of medical studies revealed that patients
with self-management written action plans had fewer
hospitalizations, fewer emergency department visits,
and improved lung function. They also had a 70%
lower mortality rate. If more intense treatment is necessary, it should be continued for several days. Over-thecounter ‘‘remedies’’ should be avoided. When deciding
whether a patient should be hospitalized, the past history of acute attacks, severity of symptoms, current
medication, and whether good support is available at
home all must be taken into account.
Referral to an asthma specialist should be considered if:
 there has been a life-threatening asthma attack or
severe, persistent asthma
treatment for three to six months has not met its
goals
 some other condition, such as nasal polyps or
chronic lung disease, is complicating asthma
 special tests, such as allergy skin testing or an allergen challenge, are needed
 intensive steroid therapy has been necessary
Special populations
INFANTS AND YOUNG CHILDREN. It is especially
important to closely watch the course of asthma in
young patients. Treatment is cut down when possible
and if there is no clear improvement, some other treatment should be tried. If a viral infection leads to severe
asthmatic symptoms, steroids may help. The health
care provider should write out an asthma treatment
plan for the child’s school. Asthmatic children often
need medication at school to control acute symptoms
or to prevent exercise-induced attacks. Proper management will usually allow a child to take part in play
activities. Only as a last resort should activities be
limited.
THE ELDERLY. Older persons often have other
types of obstructive lung disease, such as chronic
bronchitis or emphysema. This makes it important
to know to what extent the symptoms are caused
by asthma. Giving steroids for two to three weeks
can help determine this. Side-effects from betareceptor agonist drugs (including a speeding heart
and tremor) may be more common in older
patients. These patients may benefit from receiving
an anti-cholinergic drug, along with the beta-receptor agonist. If theophylline is given, the dose
should be limited, as older patients are less able
to clear this drug from their blood. Steroids should
be avoided, as they often make elderly patients
confused and agitated. Steroids may also further
weaken the bones.
Prognosis
Most patients with asthma respond well when
the best drug or combination of drugs is found, and
they are able to lead relatively normal lives. More
than one-half of affected children stop having
attacks by the time they reach 21 years of age.
Many others have less frequent and less severe
attacks as they grow older. Urgent measures to
control asthma attacks and ongoing treatment to
prevent attacks are equally important. A small minority of patients will have progressively more trouble breathing and run a risk of going into
respiratory failure, for which they must receive
intensive treatment.
Prevention
Minimizing exposure to allergens
There are a number of ways to cut down exposure
to the common allergens and irritants that provoke
asthmatic attacks, or to avoid them altogether:
 If the patient is sensitive to a family pet, removing the
animal or at least keeping it out of the bedroom (with
the bedroom door closed), as well as keeping the pet
away from carpets and upholstered furniture and
Removing hair and feathers.
 To reduce exposure to house dust mites, removing
wall-to-wall carpeting, keeping humidity down, and
using special pillows and mattress covers. Cutting
down on stuffed toys, and washing them each week
in hot water.
 If cockroach allergen is causing asthma attacks, killing the roaches (using poison, traps, or boric acid
rather than chemicals). Taking care not to leave food
or garbage exposed.
 Keeping indoor air clean by vacuuming carpets
once or twice a week (with the patient absent),
avoiding using humidifiers. Using air conditioning
during warm weather (so that the windows can be
closed).
 Avoiding exposure to tobacco smoke.
 Not exercising outside when air pollution levels are
high.
 When asthma is related to exposure at work, taking
all precautions, including wearing a mask and, if
necessary, arranging to work in a safer area.
More than 80% of people with asthma have
rhinitis and recent research emphasizes that treating
rhinitis helps benefit ashtma. Prescription nasal steroids and other methods to control rhinitis (in addition to avoiding known allergens) can help prevent
asthma attacks. It is also important for patients to
keep open communication with physicians to ensure
that the correcnt amount of medication is being
taken.