Definition
Astigmatism is the result of an inability of the
cornea to properly focus an image onto the retina.
The result is a blurred image.
Description
The cornea is the outermost part of the eye. It is a
transparent layer that covers the colored part of the eye
(iris), pupil, and lens. The cornea bends light and helps
to focus it onto the retina where specialized cells (photo
receptors) detect light and transmit nerve impulses via
the optic nerve to the brain where the image is formed.
The cornea is dome shaped. Any incorrect shaping of
the cornea results in an incorrect focusing of the light
that passes through that part of the cornea. The bending
of light is called refraction and focusing problems with
the cornea are called diseases of refraction or refractive
disorders. Astigmatism is an image distortion that
results from an improperly shaped cornea. Usually the
cornea is spherically shaped, like a baseball. However, in
astigmatism the cornea is elliptically shaped, more like a
football. There is a long meridian and a short meridian.
These two meridians generally have a constant curvature and are generally perpendicular to each other
(regular astigmatism). Irregular astigmatism may have
more than two meridians of focus and they may not be
908 apart. A point of light, therefore, going through an
astigmatic cornea will have two points of focus, instead
of one nice sharp image on the retina. This will cause the
person to have blurry vision. What the blur looks like
will depend upon the amount and the direction of the
astigmatism. A person with nearsightedness (myopia) or
farsightedness (hyperopia) may see a dot as a blurred
circle. A person with astigmatism may see the same dot
as a blurred oval or frankfurter-shaped blur.
Some cases of astigmatism are caused by problems
in the lens of the eye. Minor variations in the curvature
of the lens can produce minor degrees of astigmatism
(lenticular astigmatism). In these patients, the cornea is
usually normal in shape. Infants, as a group, have the
least amount of astigmatism. Astigmatism may increase
during childhood, as the eye is developing.
Causes and symptoms
The main symptom of astigmatism is blurring.
People can also experience headaches and eyestrain.
Parents can notice that a child may have astigmatism when the child can see some part of a pattern
or picture more clearly than others. For example,
lines going across may seem clearer than lines going
up and down.
Regular astigmatism can be caused by the weight
of the upper eyelid resting on the eyeball creating
distortion, surgical incisions in the cornea, trauma or
scarring to the cornea, the presence of tumors in the
eyelid, or a developmental factor. Irregular astigmatism can be caused by scarring or keratoconus.
Keratoconus is a condition in which the cornea thins
and becomes cone shaped. It usually occurs around
puberty and is more common in women. Although the
causes of keratoconus are unknown, it may be hereditary or a result of chronic eye rubbing, as in people
with allergies. The center of the cone may not be in line
with the center of the cornea. Diabetes can play a role
in the development of astigmatism. High blood sugar
levels can cause shape changes in the lens of the eye.
This process usually occurs slowly and, often, is only
noticed when the diabetic has started treatment to
control their blood sugar. The return to a more normal
blood sugar allows the lens to return to normal and
this change is sometimes noticed by the patient as
farsightedness. Because of this, diabetics should wait
until their blood sugar is under control for at least one
month to allow vision to stabilize before being measured for eyeglasses.
Diagnosis
Patients seek treatment because of blurred vision.
A variety of tests can be used to detect astigmatism
during the eye exam. The patient may be asked to
describe the astigmatic dial, a series of lines that radiate outward from a center. People with astigmatism
will see some of the lines more clearly than others.
One diagnostic instrument used is the keratometer.
This measures the curvature of the central cornea.
It measures the amount and direction of the curvature.
A corneal topographer can measure a larger area of
the cornea. It can measure the central area and
mid-periphery of the cornea. A keratoscope projects
a series of concentric light rings onto the cornea.
Misshapen areas of the cornea are revealed by noting
areas of the light pattern that do not appear concentric on the cornea. Because these instruments are
measuring the cornea, it is also important to have a
refraction in case the lens is also contributing to the
astigmatism. The refraction measures the optics or
visual status of the eye and the result is the eyeglass
prescription. The refraction is when the patient is looking at an eye chart and the doctor is putting different
lenses in front of the patient’s eyes and asks which one
looks better.
Treatment
Astigmatism can be treated by the use of cylindrical lenses. They can be in eyeglasses or contact lenses.
The unit of measure describing the power of the lens
system or lens is called the diopter (D). The lenses are
shaped to counteract the shape of the sections of
cornea that are causing the difficulty. Because the
correction is in one direction, it is written in terms of
the axis the correction is in. On a prescription, for
example, it may say -1.00  1808. Cylinders correct
astigmatism, minus spheres correct myopia, and plus
spheres correct hyperopia.
There is some debate as to whether people with
very small amounts of astigmatism should be treated.
Generally, if visual acuity is good and the patient
experiences no overt symptoms, treatment is not
necessary. When treating larger amounts of astigmatism, or astigmatism for the first time, the doctor may
not totally correct the astigmatism. The cylindrical
correction in the eyeglasses may make the floor appear
to tilt, thus making it difficult for the patient at first.
Generally, the doctor will place lenses in a trial frame
to allow the patient to try the prescription at the exam.
It may take a week or so to get used to the glasses,
however, if the patient is having a problem they should
contact their doctor, who might want to recheck the
prescription.
Contact lenses that are used to correct astigmatism are called toric lenses. When a person blinks, the
contact lens rotates. In toric lenses, it is important for
the lens to return to the same position each time.
Lenses have thin zones, or cut-off areas (truncated),
or have other ways to rotate and return to the correct
position. Soft toric lenses are available in a variety of
prescriptions, materials, and even in tints. Patients
should ask their doctors about the possibility of toric
lenses.
In 1997, the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) approved laser treatment of astigmatism.
Patients considering this should make sure the surgeon
has a lot of experience in the procedure and discuss the
possible side effects or risks with the doctor. In the
case of keratoconus, a corneal transplant is performed
if the astigmatism can not be corrected with hard
contact lenses.
Prognosis
Astigmatism is a condition that may be present at
birth. It may also be acquired if something is distorting
the cornea. Vision can generally be corrected with
eyeglasses or contact lenses. The major risks of surgery
(aside from the surgical risks) are over and under
correction of the astigmatism. There is no cure for
over correction. Under correction can be solved by
repeating the operation.