Definition
Aston-Patterning is an integrated system of movement education, bodywork, ergonomic adjustments,
and fitness training that recognizes the relationship
between the body and mind for well being. It helps
people who seek a remedy from acute or chronic pain
by teaching them to improve postural and movement
patterns.
Purpose
Aston-Patterning assists people in finding more
efficient and less stressful ways of performing the
simple movements of everyday life to dissipate tension
in the body. This is done through massage, alteration
of the environment, and fitness training.
Description
Seeking to solve movement problems, AstonPatterning helps make the most of their own unique
body types rather than trying to force them to conform
to an ideal. Unlike Rolfing, it doesn’t strive for linear
symmetry. Rather it works with asymmetry in the
human body to develop patterns of alignment and
movement that feel right to the individual. Aston
also introduced the idea of working in a three-dimensional spinal pattern. Aston-Patterning sessions have
four general components. They are:
 A personal history that helps the practitioner assess
the client’s needs.
 Pre-testing, in which the practitioner and the client
explore patterns of movement and potential for
improvement.
 Movement education and bodywork, including massage, myofacial release, and arthrokinetics, to help
release tension andmakenewmovementpatterns easier.
 Post-testing, when pre-testing movements are
repeated, allowing the client to feel the changes that
have taken place and integrate them into daily life.
Aston-Patterning requires more participation
from the client than many bodywork techniques. The
massage aspect of Aston-Patterning is designed
around a three-dimensional, non-compressive touch
that releases patterns of tension in the body. It is
gentler than Rolfing. Myokinetics uses touch to
release tension in the face and neck. Arthrokinetics
addresses tension at bones and joints. This massage
is accompanied by education about how new movement patterns may be established.
In addition to Aston-Patterning sessions, clients
are also helped to examine their environment for factors, such as seating or sleeping arrangements, that
may limit their body function and introduce tension.
Finally, they may choose to participate in the Aston
fitness training program that includes loosening techniques based on self-massage, toning, stretching, and
cardiovascular fitness.
Preparations
No special preparation need be taken.
Precautions
No special precautions are necessary when
participating.
Side effects
No undesirable side effects are reported. Usually
clients report a diminution of tension, improved body
movement, and an enhanced feeling of well being.
Research and general acceptance
Aston-Patterning is an outgrowth of Rolfing,
which has been shown to be of benefit in a limited
number of controlled studies. Little controlled
research has been done on the either benefits or
limitations of Aston-Patterning. Its claims have been
neither proven nor disproved, although anecdotally
many clients report relief from pain and tension and
also improved body movement.