Definition
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), also called Louis-Bar
syndrome, is a rare, genetic neurological disorder of
childhood that progressively destroys part of the
motor control area of the brain, leading to a lack of
balance and coordination. A-T also affects the
immune system and increases the risk of leukemia
and lymphoma in affected individuals.
Description
The disorder first appeared in the medical literature in the mid-1920s, but was not named specifically
until 1957. The name is a combination of two recognized abnormalities: ataxia (lack of muscle control)
and telangiectasia (abnormal dilatation of capillary
vessels that often result in tumors and red skin lesions).
However, A-T involves more than just the sum of
these two findings. Other associated A-T problems
include immune system deficiencies, extreme sensitivity to radiation, and blood cancers.
Medical researchers initially suspected that multiple genes (the units responsible for inherited features)
were involved. However, in 1995, mutations in a single
large gene were identified as causing A-T. Researchers
named the gene ATM for A-T, mutated. Subsequent
research revealed that ATM has a significant role in
regulating cell division. The symptoms associated with
A-T reflect the main role of the AT gene, which is to
induce several cellular responses to DNA damage,
such as preventing damaged DNA from being reproduced. When the AT gene is mutated into ATM, the
signaling networks are affected and the cell no longer
responds correctly to minimize the damage.
A-T is very rare, but it occurs in every population world wide, with an estimated frequency of
between 1/40,000 and 1/100,000 live births. But it
is believed that many A-T cases, particularly those
who die at a young age, are never properly diagnosed. Therefore, this disease may actually be
much more prevalent. According to the A-T
Project Foundation, an estimated 1% (2.5 million
in the United States) of the general population
carries defective A-T genes. Carriers of one copy
of this gene do not develop A-T, but have a significantly increased risk of cancer. This makes the
A-T gene one of the most important cancer-related
genes identified to date.
Causes and symptoms
The ATM gene is autosomal recessive, meaning
the disease occurs only if a defective gene is inherited from both parents. Infants with A-T initially
often appear very healthy. At around age two,
ataxia and nervous system abnormalities becomes
apparent. The root cause of A-T-associated ataxia
is cell death in the brain, specifically the large
branching cells of the nervous system (Purkinje’s
cells) which are located in the cerebellum. A toddler becomes clumsy, loses balance easily and lacks
muscle control. Speech becomes slurred and more
difficult, and the symptoms progressively worsen.
Between ages two and eight, telangiectases, or tiny,
red ‘‘spider’’ veins, appear on the cheeks and ears
and in the eyes.
By age 10-12, children with A-T can no longer
control their muscles. Immune system deficiencies
become common, and affected individuals are extremely sensitive to radiation. Immune system deficiencies vary between individuals but include
lower-than-normal levels of proteins that function
as antibodies (immunoglobulins) and white blood
cells (blood cells not containing ‘‘iron’’ proteins).
The thymus gland, which aids in development of
the body’s immune system, is either missing or has
developed abnormally. Intelligence is normal, but
growth may be retarded owing to immune system
or hormonal deficiencies. Individuals with A-T are
also sometimes afflicted with diabetes, prematurely
graying hair, and difficulty swallowing. As the children grow older, the immune system becomes
weaker and less capable of fighting infection. In
the later stages, recurrent respiratory infections
and blood cancers, such as leukemia or lymphoma,
are common.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis relies on recognizing the hallmarks
of A-T: progressive ataxia and telangiectasia.
However, this may be difficult as ataxia symptoms
do appear prior to telangiectasia symptoms by several years. Other symptoms can vary between individuals; for example, 70% of individuals with A-T
have a high incidence of respiratory infection, 30%
do not. The identification of the ATM gene raises
hopes that screening, and perhaps treatment, may
be possible.
Treatment
There is currently no cure for A-T, and treatment
focuses on managing the individual’s multiple symptoms. Physical therapy and speech therapy can help
the patient adjust to ataxia. Injections of gamma globulin, or extracts of human blood that contain antibodies, are used to strengthen the weakened immune
system. High-dose vitamin administrations may also
be prescribed. Research continues in many countries
to find effective treatments. Individuals and families
living with this disorder may benefit from attending
support groups.
Prognosis
A-T is a fatal condition. Children with A-T
become physically disabled by their early teens and
typically die by their early 20s, usually from the associated blood cancers and malignancies. In very rare
cases, individuals with A-T may experience slower
progression and a slightly longer life span, surviving
into their 30s. A-T carriers have a five-fold higher risk
than non-carriers of developing certain cancers, especially breast cancer.
Prevention
Medical researchers are investigating methods for
screening individuals who may be carriers of the
defective gene. Prenatal testing for A-T is possible
but not done routinely, because commercial screening
tests have yet to be developed.