Definition
Atherosclerosis is the build up of a waxy plaque
on the inside of blood vessels. In Greek, athere means
gruel, and skleros means hard. Atherosclerosis is often
called arteriosclerosis. Arteriosclerosis (from the
Greek arteria, meaning artery) is a general term for
hardening of the arteries. Arteriosclerosis can occur in
several forms, including atherosclerosis.
Description
Atherosclerosis, a progressive process responsible
for most heart disease, is a type of arteriosclerosis
or hardening of the arteries. An artery is made up of
several layers: an inner lining called the endothelium,
an elastic membrane that allows the artery to expand
and contract, a layer of smooth muscle, and a layer of
connective tissue. Arteriosclerosis is a broad term that
includes a hardening of the inner and middle layers of
the artery. It can be caused by normal aging, by high
blood pressure, and by diseases such as diabetes.
Atherosclerosis is a type of arteriosclerosis that affects
only the inner lining of an artery. It is characterized by
plaque deposits that block the flow of blood.
Plaque is made of fatty substances, cholesterol,
waste products from the cells, calcium, and fibrin, a
stringy material that helps clot blood. The plaque formation process stimulates the cells of the artery wall to
produce substances that accumulate in the inner layer.
Fat builds up within these cells and around them, and
they form connective tissue and calcium. The inner
layer of the artery wall thickens, the artery’s diameter
is reduced, and blood flow and oxygen delivery are
decreased. Plaques can rupture or crack open, causing
the sudden formation of a blood clot (thrombosis).
Atherosclerosis can cause a heart attack if it completely
blocks the blood flow in the heart (coronary) arteries. It
can cause a stroke if it completely blocks the brain
(carotid) arteries. Atherosclerosis can also occur in the
arteries of the neck, kidneys, thighs, and arms, causing
kidney failure or gangrene and amputation.
Causes and symptoms
Atherosclerosis can begin in the late teens, but it
usually takes decades to cause symptoms. Some people
experience rapidly progressing atherosclerosis during
their thirties, others during their fifties or sixties.
Atherosclerosis is complex. Its exact cause is still
unknown. It is thought that atherosclerosis is caused
by a response to damage to the endothelium from high
cholesterol, high blood pressure, and cigarette smoking.
A person who has all three of these risk factors is eight
times more likely to develop atherosclerosis than is a
person who has none. Physical inactivity, diabetes, and
obesity are also risk factors for atherosclerosis. High
levels of the amino acid homocysteine and abnormal
levels of protein-coated fats called lipoproteins also
raise the risk of coronary artery disease. These substances are the targets of much current research. The
role of triglycerides, another fat that circulates in the
blood, in forming atherosclerotic plaques is unclear.
High levels of triglycerides are often associated with
diabetes, obesity, and low levels of high-density lipoproteins (HDL cholesterol). The more HDL (‘‘good’’)
cholesterol, in the blood, the less likely is coronary
artery disease. These risk factors are all modifiable.
Non-modifiable risk factors are heredity, sex, and age.
Risk factors that can be changed:
 Cigarette/tobacco smoke–Smoking increases both
the chance of developing atherosclerosis and the
chance of dying from coronary heart disease.
Second hand smoke may also increase risk.
 High blood cholesterol–Cholesterol, a soft, waxy
substance, comes from foods such as meat, eggs,
and other animal products and is produced in the
liver. Age, sex, heredity, and diet affect cholesterol.
Total blood cholesterol is considered high at levels
above 240 mg/dL and borderline at 200-239 mg/dL.
High-risk levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL
cholesterol) begin at 130-159 mg/dL.
 High triglycerides–Most fat in food and in the body
takes the form of triglycerides. Blood triglyceride
levels above 400 mg/dL have been linked to coronary
artery disease in some people. Triglycerides, however, are not nearly as harmful as LDL cholesterol.
 High blood pressure–Blood pressure of 140 over 90
or higher makes the heart work harder, and over
time, both weakens the heart and harms the arteries.
 Physical inactivity–Lack of exercise increases the
risk of atherosclerosis.
 Diabetes mellitus–The risk of developing atherosclerosis is seriously increased for diabetics and can be lowered by keeping diabetes under control. Most diabetics
die from heart attacks caused by atherosclerosis.
 Obesity–Excess weight increases the strain on the
heart and increases the risk of developing atherosclerosis even if no other risk factors are present.
Risk factors that cannot be changed:
 Heredity–People whose parents have coronary
artery disease, atherosclerosis, or stroke at an early
age are at increased risk. The high rate of severe
hypertension among African-Americans puts them
at increased risk.
 Sex–Before age 60, men are more likely to have heart
attacks than women are. After age 60, the risk is
equal among men and women.
 Age–Risk is higher in men who are 45 years of age and
older and women who are 55 years of age and older.
Symptoms differ depending upon the location of
the atherosclerosis.
 In the coronary (heart) arteries: Chest pain, heart
attack, or sudden death.
 In the carotid (brain) arteries: Sudden dizziness,
weakness, loss of speech, or blindness.
 In the femoral (leg) arteries: Disease of the blood
vessels in the outer parts of the body (peripheral
vascular disease) causes cramping and fatigue in the
calves when walking.
 In the renal (kidney) arteries: High blood pressure
that is difficult to treat.
Diagnosis
Physicians may be able to make a diagnosis of
atherosclerosis during a physical exam by means of a
stethoscope and gentle probing of the arteries with the
hand (palpation). More definite tests are electrocardiography, echocardiography or ultrasonography of the
arteries (for example, the carotids), radionuclide
scans, and angiography.
An electrocardiogram shows the heart’s activity.
Electrodes covered with conducting jelly are placed on
the patient’s body. They send impulses of the heart to a
recorder. The test takes about 10 minutes and is performed in a physician’s office. Exercise electrocardiography (stress test) is conducted while the patient
exercises on a treadmill or a stationary bike. It is
performed in a physician’s office or an exercise laboratory and takes 15-30 minutes.
Echocardiography, cardiac ultrasound, uses sound
waves to create an image of the heart’s chambers and
valves. A technician applies gel to a hand-held transducer, presses it against the patient’s chest, and images are
displayed on a monitor. This technique cannot evaluate
the coronary arteries directly. They are too small and
are in motion with the heart. Severe coronary artery
disease, however, may cause abnormal heart motion
that is detected by echocardiography. Performed in a
cardiology outpatient diagnostic laboratory, the test
takes 30-60 minutes. Ultrasonography is also used to
assess arteries of the neck and thighs.
Radionuclide angiography and thallium (or sestamibi) scanning enable physicians to see the blood
flow through the coronary arteries and the heart
chambers. Radioactive material is injected into the
bloodstream. A device that uses gamma rays to
produce an image of the radioactive material
(gamma camera) records pictures of the heart.
Radionuclide angiography is usually performed in
a hospital’s nuclear medicine department and takes
30-60 minutes. Thallium scanning is usually done
after an exercise stress test or after injection of a
vasodilator, a drug to enlarge the blood vessels, like
dipyridamole (Persantine). Thallium is injected, and
the scan is done then and again four hours (and
possibly 24 hours) later. Thallium scanning is
usually performed in a hospital’s nuclear medicine
department. Each scan takes 30-60 minutes.
Coronary angiography is the most accurate diagnostic method and the only one that requires entering
the body (invasive procedure). A cardiologist inserts a
catheter equipped with a viewing device into a blood
vessel in the leg or arm and guides it into the heart. The
patient has been given a contrast dye that makes
the heart visible to x rays. Motion pictures are taken
of the contrast dye flowing though the arteries.
Plaques and blockages, if present, are well defined.
The patient is awake but has been given a sedative.
Coronary angiography is performed in a cardiac
catheterization laboratory and takes from 30 minutes
to two hours.
Treatment
Treatment includes lifestyle changes, lipid-lowering drugs, percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty, and coronary artery bypass surgery.
Atherosclerosis requires lifelong care.
Patients who have less severe atherosclerosis may
achieve adequate control through lifestyle changes
and drug therapy. Many of the lifestyle changes that
prevent disease progression–a low-fat, low-cholesterol
diet, losing weight (if necessary), exercise, controlling
blood pressure, and not smoking–also help prevent the
disease.
Most of the drugs prescribed for atherosclerosis
seek to lower cholesterol. Many popular lipid-lowering drugs can reduce LDL-cholesterol by an average
of 25-30% when combined with a low-fat, lowcholesterol diet. Lipid-lowering drugs include bile
acid resins, ‘‘statins’’ (drugs that effect HMG-CoA
reductase, an enzyme that controls the processing of
cholesterol), niacin, and fibric acid derivatives such as
gemfibrozil (Lobid). Aspirin helps prevent thrombosis
and a variety of other medications can be used to treat
the effects of atherosclerosis.Percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty
and bypass surgery are invasive procedures that
improve blood flow in the coronary arteries.
Percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (coronary angioplasty) is a non-surgical procedure in
which a catheter tipped with a balloon is threaded
from a blood vessel in the thigh into the blocked
artery. The balloon is inflated, compresses the plaque
to enlarge the blood vessel, and opens the blocked
artery. Coronary angioplasty is performed by a cardiologist in a hospital and generally requires a hospital
stay of one or two days. It is successful about 90% of
the time, but for one-third of patients the artery narrows again within six months. It can be repeated and a
‘‘stent’’ may be placed in the artery to help keep it open
(see below).
In coronary artery bypass surgery (bypass surgery), a detour is built around the blockage with a
healthy vein or artery, which then supplies oxygenrich blood to the heart. It is major surgery appropriate
for patients with blockages in two or three major
coronary arteries or severely narrowed left main coronary arteries, and for those who have not responded
to other treatments. It is performed in a hospital under
general anesthesia and uses a heart-lung machine.
About 70% of patients experience full relief; about
20% partial relief.
Three other semi-experimental surgical procedures may be used to treat atherosclerosis. In atherectomy, a cardiologist shaves off and removes strips
of plaque from the blocked artery. In laser angioplasty, a catheter with a laser tip is inserted to burn
or break down the plaque. A metal coil called a
stent may be permanently implanted to keep a
blocked artery open.
Alternative treatment
Alternative therapies that focus on diet and lifestyle can help prevent, retard, or reverse atherosclerosis. Herbal therapies that may be helpful include:
hawthorn (Crataegus laevigata), notoginseng root
(Panax notoginseng), garlic (Allium sativum), ginger
(Zingiber officinale), hot red or chili peppers, yarrow
(Achillea millefolium), and alfalfa (Medicago sativum).
Relaxation techniques including yoga, meditation,
guided imagery, biofeedback, and counseling and
other ‘‘talking’’ therapies may also be useful to prevent
or slow the progress of the disease. Dietary modifications focus on eating foods that are low in fats (especially saturated fats), cholesterol, sugar, and animal
proteins and high in fiber and antioxidants (found in
fresh fruits and vegetables). Liberal use of onions and
garlic is recommended, as is eating raw and cooked
fish, especially cold-water fish like salmon. Smoking,
alcohol, and stimulants like coffee should be avoided.
Chelation therapy, which uses anticoagulant drugs and
nutrients to dissolve plaque and flush it through the
kidneys, is controversial. Long-term remedies can be
prescribed by specialists in ayurvedic medicine, which
combines diet, herbal remedies, relaxation and exercise, and homeopathy, which treats a disease with
small doses of a drug that causes the symptoms of
the disease.
Prognosis
Atherosclerosis can be successfully treated but not
cured. Recent clinical studies have shown that atherosclerosis can be delayed, stopped, and even reversed by
aggressively lowering LDL cholesterol. New diagnostic techniques enable physicians to identify and treat
atherosclerosis in its earliest stages. New technologies
and surgical procedures have extended the lives of
many patients who would otherwise have died.
Research continues.
Prevention
A healthy lifestyle–eating right, regular exercise,
maintaining a healthy weight, not smoking, and controlling hypertension–can reduce the risk of developing atherosclerosis, help keep the disease from
progressing, and sometimes cause it to regress.
 Eat right-A healthy diet reduces excess levels of LDL
cholesterol and triglycerides. It includes a variety of
foods that are low in fat and cholesterol and high in
fiber; plenty of fruits and vegetables; and limited
sodium. Fat should comprise no more than 30%,
and saturated fat no more than 8-10%, of total
daily calories according to the American Heart
Association. Cholesterol should be limited to about
300 milligrams per day and sodium to about 2,400
milligrams. The ‘‘Food Guide’’ Pyramid developed
by the U.S. Departments of Agriculture and Health
and Human Services provides daily guidelines: 6-11
servings of bread, cereal, rice, and pasta; 3-5 servings
of vegetables; 2-4 servings of fruit; 2-3 servings of
milk, yogurt, and cheese; and 2-3 servings of meat,
poultry, fish, dry beans, eggs, and nuts. Fats, oils,
and sweets should be used sparingly. Mono-unsaturated oils, like olive and rapeseed (Canola) are good
alternatives to use for cooking.
 Exercise regularly–Aerobic exercise can lower blood
pressure, help control weight, and increase HDL
(‘‘good’’) cholesterol. It may keep the blood vessels more flexible. Moderate to intense aerobic exercise
lasting about 30 minutes (or three 10-minute exercise
periods) four or more times per week is recommended, according to the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention and the American College
of Sports Medicine. Aerobic exercise includes walking, jogging, and cycling, active gardening, climbing
stairs, or brisk housework. A physician should be
consulted before exercise if a person has atherosclerosis or is at increased risk for it.
 Maintain a desirable body weight–Losing weight can
help reduce total and LDL cholesterol, reduce triglycerides, and boost HDL cholesterol. It may also
reduce blood pressure. Eating right and exercising
are two key components in maintaining a desirable
body weight.
 Do not smoke or use tobacco–Smoking has many
adverse effects on the heart but quitting can repair
damage. Ex-smokers face the same risk of heart disease as non-smokers within five to 10 years of quitting. Smoking is the worst thing a person can do to
their heart and lungs.
 Seek treatment for hypertension–High blood pressure can be controlled through lifestyle changes–
reducing sodium and fat, exercising, managing
stress, quitting smoking, and drinking alcohol in
moderation–and medication. Drugs that provide
effective treatment are: diuretics, beta-blockers, sympathetic nerve inhibitors, vasodilators, angiotensin
converting enzyme inhibitors, and calcium antagonists. Hypertension usually has no symptoms so it
must be checked to be known. Like cholesterol,
hypertension is called a ‘‘silent killer.’’