Definition
Atherectomy is a non-surgical procedure to open
blocked coronary arteries or vein grafts by using a device
on the end of a catheter to cut or shave away atherosclerotic plaque (a deposit of fat and other substances
that accumulate in the lining of the artery wall).
Purpose
Atherectomy is performed to restore the flow of
oxygen-rich blood to the heart, to relieve chest pain,
and to prevent heart attacks. It may be done on
patients with chest pain who have not responded to
other medical therapy and on certain of those who are
candidates for balloon angioplasty (a surgical procedure in which a balloon catheter is used to flatten
plaque against an artery wall) or coronary artery
bypass graft surgery. It is sometimes performed to
remove plaque that has built up after a coronary artery
bypass graft surgery.
Precautions
Atherectomy should not be performed when the
plaque is located where blood vessels divide into
branches, when plaque is angular or inside an angle
of a blood vessel, on patients with weak vessel walls,
on ulcerated or calcium-hardened lesions, or on
blockages through which a guide wire won’t pass.
Description
Atherectomy uses a rotating shaver or other device
placed on the end of a catheter to slice away or destroy
plaque. At the beginning of the procedure, medications
to control blood pressure, dilate the coronary arteries,
and prevent blood clots are administered. The patient is
awake but sedated. The catheter is inserted into an
artery in the groin, leg, or arm, and threaded through
the blood vessels into the blocked coronary artery. The
cutting head is positioned against the plaque and activated, and the plaque is ground up or suctioned out.
The types of atherectomy are rotational, directional, and transluminal extraction. Rotational atherectomy uses a high speed rotating shaver to grind up
plaque. Directional atherectomy was the first type
approved, but is no longer commonly used; it scrapes
plaque into an opening in one side of the catheter.
Transluminal extraction coronary atherectomy uses a
device that cuts plaque off vessel walls and vacuums it
into a bottle. It is used to clear bypass grafts.
Performed in a cardiac catheterization lab, atherectomy is also called removal of plaque from the coronary
arteries. It can be used instead of, or along with, balloon
angioplasty. Atherectomy issuccessful about 95% of the
time. Plaque forms again in 20-30% of patients.
Preparation
The day before atherectomy, the patient takes
medication to prevent blood clots and may be asked
to bathe and shampoo with an antiseptic skin cleaner.
Aftercare
After the procedure, the patient spends several days
in the hospital’s cardiac monitoring area. For at least
20 minutes, pressure is applied to a dressing on the
insertion site. For the first hour, an electrocardiogram
and close monitoring are conducted; vital signs are
checked every 15 minutes. Pain medication is then
administered. The puncture site is checked once an
hour or more. For most of the first 24 hours, the patient
remains in bed.
Risks
Chest pain is the most common complication of
atherectomy. Other common complications are injury
to the blood vessel lining, plaque that re-forms, blood
clots (hematoma), and bleeding at the site of insertion.
More serious but less frequent complications are
blood vessel holes, blood vessel wall tears, or reduced
blood flow to the heart.