Definition
A common fungus infection between the toes in
which the skin becomes itchy and sore, cracking and
peeling away. Athlete’s foot (also known as tinea pedis
or foot ringworm) can be treated, but it can be tenacious and difficult to clear up completely.
Description
Athlete’s foot is a very common condition of
itchy, peeling skin on the feet. In fact, it’s so common
that most people will have at least one episode at least
once in their lives. It’s less often found in women and
children under age 12. (Symptoms that look like athlete’s foot in young children most probably are caused
by some other skin condition).
Because the fungi grow well in warm, damp areas,
they flourish in and around swimming pools, showers,
and locker rooms. Tinea pedis got its common name
because the infection was common among athletes
who often used these areas.
Causes and symptoms
Athlete’s foot is caused by a fungal infection that
most often affects the fourth and fifth toe webs.
Trichophyton rubrum, T. mentagrophytes, and
Epidermophyton floccosum, the fungi that cause athlete’s foot, are unusual in that they live exclusively on
dead body tissue (hair, the outer layer of skin, and
nails). The fungus grows best in moist, damp, dark
places with poor ventilation. The problem doesn’t
occur among people who usually go barefoot.
Many people carry the fungus on their skin.
However, it will only flourish to the point of causing
athlete’s foot if conditions are right. Many people
believe athlete’s foot is highly contagious, especially in
public swimming pools and shower rooms. Research
has shown, however, that it is difficult to pick up the
infection simply by walking barefoot over a contaminated damp floor. Exactly why some people develop
the condition and others don’t is not well understood.
Sweaty feet, tight shoes, synthetic socks that don’t
absorb moisture well, a warm climate, and not drying
the feet well after swimming or bathing, all contribute
to the overgrowth of the fungus.
Symptoms of athlete’s foot include itchy, sore skin
on the toes, with scaling, cracking, inflammation, and
blisters. Blisters that break, exposing raw patches of
tissue, can cause pain and swelling. As the infection
spreads, itching and burning may get worse.
If it’s not treated, athlete’s foot can spread to the
soles of the feet and toenails. Stubborn toenail infections
may appear at the same time, with crumbling, scaling and
thickened nails, and nail loss. The infection can spread
further if patients scratch and then touch themselves
elsewhere (especially in the groin or under the arms).
It’s also possible to spread the infection to other parts
of the body via contaminated bed sheets or clothing.
Diagnosis
Not all foot rashes are athlete’s foot, which is why a
physician should diagnose the condition before any
remedies are used. Using nonprescription products on a
rash that is not athlete’s foot could make the rash worse.
A dermatologist can diagnose the condition by
physical examination and by examining a preparation
of skin scrapings under a microscope. This test, called
a KOH preparation, treats a sample of tissue scraped
from the infected area with heat and potassium hydroxide (KOH). This treatment dissolves certain substances in the tissue sample, making it possible to see
the fungi under the microscope.
Treatment
Athlete’s foot may be resistant to medication and
should not be ignored. Simple cases usually respond
well to antifungal creams or sprays (clotrimazole, ketoconazole, miconazole nitrate, sulconazole nitrate, or
tolnaftate). If the infection is resistant to topical treatment, the doctor may prescribe an oral antifungal drug.
Untreated athlete’s foot may lead to a secondary
bacterial infection in the skin cracks.
Alternative treatment
A footbath containing cinnamon has been shown
to slow down the growth of certain molds and fungi,
and is said to be very effective in clearing up athlete’s
foot. To make the bath:
 heat four cups of water to a boil
 add eight to 10 broken cinnamon sticks
 reduce heat and simmer five minutes
 remove and let the mixture steep for 45 minutes until
lukewarm
 soak feet
Other herbal remedies used externally to treat
athlete’s foot include: a foot soak or powder containing goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis); tea tree oil
(Melaleuca spp.); or calendula (Calendula officinalis)
cream to help heal cracked skin.
Prognosis
Athlete’s foot usually responds well to treatment,
but it is important to take all medication as directed by
a dermatologist, even if the skin appears to be free of
fungus. Otherwise, the infection could return. The toenail infections that may accompany athlete’s foot,
however, are typically very hard to treat effectively.
Prevention
Good personal hygiene and a few simple precautions can help prevent athlete’s foot. To prevent
spread of athlete’s foot:
 wash feet daily
 dry feet thoroughly (especially between toes) avoid tight shoes (especially in summer)
 wear sandals during warm weather
 wear cotton socks and change them often if they get
damp
 don’t wear socks made of synthetic material
 go barefoot outdoors when possible
 wear bathing shoes in public bathing or showering
areas
 use a good quality foot powder
 don’t wear sneakers without socks
 wash towels, contaminated floors, and shower stalls
well with hot soapy water if anyone in the family has
athlete’s foot.