Definition
Athletic heart syndrome is the adaptation of
an athlete’s heart in response the physiologic stresses
of strenuous physical training. It can be difficult to
distinguish a significant medical condition from an
athletic heart.
Description
The heart adapts to physical demands by enlarging, especially the left ventricle. Enlargement increases
the cardiac output, the amount of blood pumped with
each beat of the heart. The exact type of adaptation
depends on the nature of the physical demand. There
are two types of demand, static and dynamic. Static
demand involves smaller groups of muscles under
extreme resistance for brief period. An example is
weight lifting. Dynamic training involves larger groups
of muscles at lower resistance for extended periods of
time. Examples are aerobic training and tennis.
Cardiac enlargement is associated with dynamic training. The heart’s response to static training is hypertrophy, thickening of the muscle walls of the heart. As
the wall of the heart adapts, there are changes in the
electrical conducting system of the heart. Because of
the larger volume of blood being pumped with each
heart beat, the heart rate when at rest decreases
below the normal level for nonathletes.
Sudden unexpected death (SUD) is the death of an
athlete, usually during or shortly after physical activity. Often, there is no warning that the person will
experience SUD, although in some cases, warning
signs appear which cause the person to seek medical
advice. Importantly, cases of death occurring during
physical activity are not caused by athletic heart
syndrome, but by undiagnosed heart disorders.
Causes and symptoms
Athletic heart syndrome is the consequence of a
normal adaptation by the heart to increased physical
activity. The changes in the electrical conduction system of the heart may be pronounced and diagnostic,
but should not cause problems. In the case of SUD,
other heart problems are involved. In 85-97% of the
cases of SUD, an underlying structural defect of the
heart has been noted.
Diagnosis
The changes in the heart beat caused by the electrical conduction system of the heart are detectable on
an electrocardiogram. Many of the changes seen in
athletic heart syndrome mimic those of various heart
diseases. Careful examination must be made to distinguish heart disease from athletic heart syndrome.
Prognosis
The yearly rate for occurrence of SUD in people
less than 35 years of age is less than 7 incidents per
100,000. Of all SUD cases, only about 8% are exercise
related. On a national basis, this means that each year
approximately 25 athletes experience SUD. In persons
over age 35, the incidence of SUD is approximately 55
in 100,000, with only 3% of the cases occurring during
exercise.