Definition
Eczema is a general term used to describe a variety
of conditions that cause an itchy, inflamed skin
rash. Atopic dermatitis, a form of eczema, is a noncontagious disorder characterized by chronically
inflamed skin and sometimes intolerable itching.
Description
Atopic dermatitis refers to a wide range of diseases that are often associated with stress and allergic
disorders that involve the respiratory system, like
asthma and hay fever. Although atopic dermatitis
can appear at any age, it is most common in children
and young adults. Symptoms usually abate before the
age of 25 and do not affect the patient’s general health.
About one in ten babies develop a form of atopic
dermatitis called infantile eczema. Characterized by skin
that oozes and becomes encrusted, infantile eczema most
often occurs on the face and scalp. The condition usually
improves before the child’s second birthday, andmedical
attention can keep symptoms in check until that time.
When atopic dermatitis develops after infancy,
inflammation, blistering, oozing, and crusting are less
pronounced. The patient’s sores become dry, turn from
red to brownish-gray, and skin may thicken and become
scaly. In dark-skinned individuals, this condition can
cause the complexion to lighten or darken. Itching associated with this condition is usually worst at night. It
can be so intense that patients scratch until their sores
bleed, sometimes causing scarring and infection.
Atopic dermatitis affects about 3% of the population of the United States, and about 80% of the people
who have the condition have one or more relatives with
the same condition or a similar one. Symptoms tend to
be most severe in females. Atopic dermatitis can erupt on
any part of the skin, and crusted, thickened patches on
the fingers, palms, or the soles of the feet can last for
years. In teenagers and young adults, atopic dermatitis
often appears on one or more of the following areas:
 elbow creases
 backs of the knees
 ankles
 wrists
 face
 neck
 upper chest
 palms and between the fingers
Causes and symptoms
While allergic reactions often trigger atopic
dermatitis, the condition is thought to be the result
of an inherited over-active immune system or a
genetic defect that causes the skin to lose abnormally large amounts of moisture. The condition can
be aggravated by a cycle that develops in which the
skin itches, the patient scratches, the condition worsens, the itching worsens, the patient scratches, etc.
This cycle must be broken by relieving the itching to
allow the skin time to heal. If the skin becomes
broken, there is also a risk of developing skin infections which, if not recognized and treated promptly,
can become more serious.
Symptoms of atopic dermatitis include the
following:
 an itchy rash and dry, thickened skin on areas of the
body where moisture can be trapped
 continual scratching
 chronic fatigue, caused when itching disrupts sleep
 An individual is more at-risk for developing the
condition if there is a personal or family history of
atopic dermatitis, hay fever, asthma, or other allergies.
Exposure to any of the following can cause a flare-up:
 hot or cold temperatures
 wool and synthetic fabrics
 detergents, fabric softeners, and chemicals
 use of drugs that suppress immune-system activity
Certain foods, such as peanuts, cow’s milk, eggs,
and fish, can trigger symptoms of atopic dermatitis.
A small percentage of patients with atopic dermatitis
find that their symptoms worsen after having been
exposed to dust, feather pillows, rough-textured fabrics, or other materials to which dust adheres.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of atopic dermatitis is usually based on
the patient’s symptoms and personal and family
health history. Skin tests do not generally provide
reliable information about this condition.
Treatment
Atopic dermatitis cannot be cured, but the severity and duration of symptoms can be controlled.
A dermatologist should be consulted when symptoms
first appear, and is likely to recommend warm baths to
loosen encrusted skin, followed by applications of
petroleum jelly or vegetable shortening to prevent the
skin’s natural moisture from escaping.
Externally applied (topical) steroids or preparations containing coal tar can relieve minor itching, but
coal tar has an unpleasant odor, stains clothes, and
may increase skin-cancer risk. Excessive use of steroid
creams in young children can alter growth. Pregnant
women should not use products that contain coal tar.
Topical steroids can cause itching, burning, acne, permanent stretch marks, and thinning and spotting of
the skin. Applying topical steroids to the area around
the eyes can cause glaucoma.
Oral antihistamines, such as diphenhydramine
(Benadryl), can relieve symptoms of allergy-related
atopic dermatitis. More concentrated topical steroids
are recommended for persistent symptoms. A mild
tranquilizer may be prescribed to reduce stress and
help the patient sleep, and antibiotics are used to
treat secondary infections.
Cortisone ointments should be used sparingly,
and strong preparations should never be applied
to the face, groin, armpits, or rectal area. Regular
medical monitoring is recommended for patients
who use cortisone salves or lotions to control widespread symptoms. Oral cortisone may be prescribed
if the patient does not respond to other treatments,
but patients who take the medication for more than
two weeks have a greater-than-average risk of developing severe symptoms when the treatment is
discontinued.
Allergy shots rarely improve atopic dermatitis
and sometimes aggravate the symptoms. Since food
allergies may trigger atopic dermatitis, the doctor
may suggest eliminating certain foods from the diet if
other treatments prove ineffective.
If symptoms are extremely severe, ultraviolet
light therapy may be prescribed, and a wet body
wrap recommended to help the skin retain moisture. This technique, used most often with children,
involves sleeping in a warm room while wearing
wet pajamas under dry clothing, rain gear, or a
nylon sweatsuit. The patient’s face may be covered
with wet gauze covered by elastic bandages, and
his hands encased in wet socks covered by dry
ones.
A physician should be notified if the condition is
widespread or resists treatment, or the skin oozes,
becomes encrusted, or smells, as this may indicate an
infection.
Alternative treatment
Alternative therapies can sometimes bring relief
or resolution of atopic dermatitis when conventional
therapies are not helping. If the condition becomes
increasingly widespread or infected, a physician
should be consulted.
Helpful alternative treatments for atopic dermatitis may include:
 Taking regular brisk walks, followed by bathing in
warm water sprinkled with essential oil of lavender
(Lavandula officinalis); lavender oil acts as a nerve
relaxant for the whole body including the skin
 Supplementing the diet daily with zinc, fish oils, vitamin A, vitamin E, and evening primrose oil (Oenothera
biennis)–all good sources of nutrients for the skin
 Reducing or eliminating red meat from the diet
 Eliminating or rotating potentially allergic foods
such as cow’s milk, peanuts, wheat, eggs, and soy
 Implementing stress reduction techniques in daily
life.
Herbal therapies also can be helpful in treating
atopic dermatitis. Western herbal remedies used in the
treatment of this condition include burdock (Arctium
lappa) and Ruta (Ruta graveolens). Long-term herbal
therapy requires monitoring and should be guided by
an experienced practitioner.
Other alternative techniques that may be useful in
the treatment of atopic dermatitis include:
 Acupressure (acupuncture without needles) to relieve
tension that may trigger a flare
 Aromatherapy, using essential oils like lavender,
thyme (Thymus vulgaris), jasmine (Jasminum officinale) and chamomile (Matricaria recutita) in hot
water, to add a soothing fragrance to the air
 Shiatsu massage and reflexology, performed by
licensed practitioners, to alleviate symptoms by
restoring the body’s natural balance
 Homeopathy, which may temporarily worsen
symptoms before relieving them, and should be
supervised by a trained alternative healthcare
professional
 Hydrotherapy, which uses water, ice, liquid, and
steam, to stimulate the immune system
 Juice therapy to purify the liver and relieve bowel
congestion
 Yoga to induce a sense of serenity.
Prognosis
Atopic dermatitis is unpredictable. Although
symptoms occur less often with age and sometimes
disappear altogether, they can recur without warning. Atopic dermatitis lowers resistance to infection
and increases the risk of developing cataracts. Sixty
percent of patients with atopic dermatitis will
experience flares and remissions throughout their
lives.
Prevention
Research has shown that babies weaned from
breast milk before they are four months old are almost
three times more likely than other babies to develop
recurrent eczema. Feeding eggs or fish to a baby less
than one year old can activate symptoms, and babies
should be shielded from such irritants as mites, molds,
pet hair, and smoke.
Possible ways to prevent flare-ups include the
following:
 eliminate activities that cause sweating
 lubricate the skin frequently
 avoid wool, perfumes, fabric softeners, soaps that
dry the skin, and other irritants
 avoid sudden temperature changes
A doctor should be notified whenever any of the
following occurs:
 fever or relentless itching develop during a flare
 an unexplained rash develops in someone who has a
personal or family history of eczema or asthma
 inflammation does not decrease after seven days of
treatment with an over-the-counter preparation containing coal tar or steroids
 a yellow, tan, or brown crust or pus-filled blisters
appear on top of an existing rash
 a person with active atopic dermatitis comes into
contact with someone who has cold sores, genital
herpes, or another viral skin disease