Definition
Atrial ectopic beats (AEB) refers to a contraction
of the upper heart chamber which occurs before it
would be expected. Atrial ectopic beats are also
known as premature atrial beats, premature atrial
complex (PAC), or atrial extrasystole.
Description
An AEB is usually a harmless disturbance in the
normal rhythm of the heart. It can occur only occasionally, in a regular pattern, or several may occur in
sequence and then disappear. Most often, the person is
unaware of the event.
Causes and symptoms
As people age, extra beats tend to happen more
frequently even in perfectly healthy individuals. AEB
may be triggered or increased by stress, caffeine,smoking, and some medicines. Cold remedies containing
ephedrine or pseudoephedrine have been known to
increase the incidence of atrial ectopic beats. AEB
may also be the result of an enlarged atria, lung disease, or the result of reduced blood supply to that area
of the heart.
If a person is aware of the event, the first symptom
of AEB is usually a feeling that the heart has skipped
or missed a beat. This is often accompanied by a
feeling that the heart is thumping or pounding in the
chest. The thumping or pounding is caused by the fact
that when there is an AEB, the pause before the next
beat is usually longer than normal. The next beat must
be stronger than usual to pump the accumulated blood
out of the chamber.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of AEB is often suspected on the basis of
the patient’s description of the occurrence. An electrocardiogram (ECG) can confirm the diagnosis. An ECG
shows the heart beat as three wave forms. The first wave
is called P, the second is called QRS, and the last is T. An
atrial ectopic beat will show up on the ECG as a P wave
that occurs closer than usual to the preceding T wave.
Treatment
Atrial ectopic beats do not usually require treatment. If treatment is necessary because the beats occur
frequently and cause intolerable discomfort, the doctor may prescribe medication.
Prognosis
Occasional AEB usually have no significance. If
they increase in frequency, they can lead to atrial
tachycardia or fibrillation and to a decrease in cardiac
output.
Prevention
AEB cannot usually be prevented. Aggravating
factors can be addressed, like excessive stimulants,
and uncontrolled pulmonary disorders.