Definition
An atrial septal defect is an abnormal opening in
the wall separating the left and right upper chambers
(atria) of the heart.
Description
During the normal development of the fetal
heart, there is an opening in the wall (the septum)
separating the left and right upper chambers of the
heart. Normally, this opening closes before birth,
but if it does not, the child is born with a hole
between the left and right atria. This abnormal
opening is called an atrial septal defect and causes
blood from the left atrium to flow into the right
atrium.
Different types of atrial septal defects can
occur, and they are classified according to where
in the separating wall they are found. The most
commonly found atrial septal defect occurs in the
middle of the atrial septum and accounts for about
70% of all atrial septal defects. Abnormal openings
can form in the upper and lower parts of the atrial
septum as well.
Causes and symptoms
Abnormal openings in the atrial septum occur
during fetal development and are twice as common
in females as in males. These abnormalities can go
unnoticed if the opening is small, producing no
abnormal symptoms. If the defect is big, large
amounts of blood flowing from the left to the
right atrium will cause the right atrium to swell to
hold the extra blood.
People born with an atrial septal defect can have
no symptoms through their twenties, but by age 40,
most people with this condition have symptoms that
can include shortness of breath, rapid abnormal beating of the atria (atrial fibrillation), and eventually
heart failure.
Diagnosis
Atrial septal defects can be identified by various
methods. Abnormal changes in the sound of the
heart beats can be heard when a doctor listens to
the heart with a stethoscope. In addition, a chest
x ray, an electrocardiogram (ECG, an electrical
printout of the heartbeats), and an echocardiogram
(a test that uses sound waves to form a detailed
image of the heart) can also be used to identify
this condition.
An atrial septal defect can also be diagnosed by
using a test called cardiac catheterization. This test
involves inserting a very thin tube (catheter) into the
heart’s chambers to measure the amount of oxygen
present in the blood within the heart. If the heart
has an opening between the atria, oxygen-rich blood
from the left atrium enters the right atrium.
Through cardiac catheterization, doctors can detect
the higher-than-normal amount of oxygen in the
heart’s right atrium, right ventricle, and the large
blood vessels that carry blood to the lungs, where
the blood would normally subsequently get its
oxygen.
Treatment
Atrial septal defects often correct themselves without medical treatments by the age of two. If this dose
not happen, surgery is done by sewing the hole closed,
or by sewing a patch of Dacron material or a piece of
the sac that surrounds the heart (the pericardium),
over the opening.
Some patients can have the defect fixed by having
an clam-shaped plug placed over the opening. This
plug is a man-made device that is put in place through
a catheter inserted into the heart.
Prognosis
Individuals with small defects can live a normal
life, but larger defects require surgical correction. Less
than 1% of people younger than 45 years of age die
from corrective surgery. Five to ten percent of patients
can die from the surgery if they are older than 40 and
have other heart-related problems. When an atrial
septal defect is corrected within the first 20 years of
life, there is an excellent chance for the individual to
live normally.