Definition
Atrial fibrillation and flutter are abnormal heart
rhythms in which the atria, or upper chambers of the
heart, are out of sync with the ventricles, or lower
chambers of the heart. In atrial fibrillation, the atria
‘‘quiver’’ chaotically and the ventricles beat irregularly. In atrial flutter, the atria beat regularly and
faster than the ventricles.
Description
Atrial fibrillation and flutter are two types of
cardiac arrhythmias, irregularities in the heart’s
rhythm. Nearly 2 million Americans have atrial fibrillation, according to the American Heart Association.
It is the most common chronic arrhythmia. Atrial
flutter is less common, but both of these arrhythmias
can cause a blood clot to form in the heart. This can
lead to a stroke or a blockage carried by the blood flow
(an embolism) anywhere in the body’s arteries. Atrial
fibrillation is responsible for about 15% of strokes.
The atria are the heart’s two small upper chambers. In atrial fibrillation, the heart beat is completely irregular. The atrial muscles contract very
quickly and irregularly; the ventricles, the heart’s
two large lower chambers, beat irregularly but not
as fast as the atria. When the atria fibrillate, blood
that is not completely pumped out can pool and
form a clot. In atrial flutter, the heart beat is
usually very fast but steady. The atria beat faster
than the ventricles.
Atrial fibrillation often occurs in people with various types of heart disease. Atrial fibrillation may also
result from an inflammation of the heart’s covering
(pericarditis), chest trauma or surgery, pulmonary disease, and certain medications. Atrial fibrillation is
more common in older people; about 10% of people
over the age of 75 have it. Atrial flutter and fibrillation
usually occur in people with hypertensive or coronary
heart disease and other types of heart disorders.
Causes and symptoms
In most cases, the cause of atrial fibrillation and
flutter can be found, but often it cannot. Causes of
these heart beat abnormalities include:
 many types of heart disease
 stress and anxiety
 caffeine
  alcohol
 tobacco
 diet pills
 some prescription and over-the-counter medications
 open heart surgery
Symptoms, when present, include:
 a fluttering feeling in the chest
 a pulse that feels like the heart is skipping, racing,
jumping, or is irregular
 low energy
 a faint or dizzy feeling
 pressure or discomfort in the chest
 shortness of breath
 anxiety
Diagnosis
A doctor can sometimes hear these arrhythmias
using an instrument (a stethoscope) to listen to the
sounds within the chest. Atrial fibrillation and flutter
are usually diagnosed through electrocardiography
(EKGs), an exercise stress test, a 24-hour Holter
EKG monitor, or a telephone cardiac monitor. An
EKG shows the heart’s activity and may reveal a
lack of oxygen (ischemia). Electrodes covered with
conducting jelly are placed on the patient’s chest,
arms, and legs. The electrodes send impulses of the
heart’s activity through a monitor (called an oscilloscope) to a recorder that traces the pattern of the
impulses onto paper. The test takes about 10 minutes
and is performed in a doctor’s office. The exercise
stress test measures how the heart and blood vessels
respond to work when the patient is exercising on a
treadmill or a stationary bike. This test is performed in
a doctor’s office within an exercise laboratory and
takes 15-30 minutes.
In 24-hour EKG (Holter) monitoring, the
patient wears a small, portable tape recorder connected to disks on his/her chest that record the
heart’s rhythm during normal activities. An EKG
called transtelephonic monitoring identifies arrhythmias that occur infrequently. Like Holter monitoring, transtelephonic monitoring continues for days
or weeks and enables patients to send the EKG via
telephone to a monitoring station when an arrhythmia
is felt, or to store the information in the recorder and
transmit it later. Doctors can also use high-frequency
sound waves (echocardiography) to determine the
structure and function of the heart. This diagnostic
method is often helpful to evaluate for underlying
heart disease.
Treatment
Atrial fibrillation and flutter are usually treated
with medications and/or electrical shock (cardioversion). In some cases, removal of a small portion of the
heart (ablation), implantation of a pacemaker or a
cardioverter defibrillator, or maze surgery is needed.
If the heart rate cannot be quickly controlled,
electrical cardioversion may be used. Cardioversion,
the electric shock to the chest wall, is usually performed emergencies. This device briefly suspends the
heart’s activity and allows it to return to a normal
rhythm.
Ablation destroys the heart tissue that causes the
arrhythmia. The tissue can be destroyed by catheterization or surgery. Radiofrequency catheter ablation,
performed in a cardiac catheterization laboratory, can
cure atrial flutter and control the heart rate in atrial
fibrillation. The patient is awake but sedated. A thin
tube called a catheter is inserted into a vein and is
threaded into the heart. At the end of the catheter, a
device maps the electrical pathways of the heart. A
cardiologist, a doctor specializing in the heart, uses
this map to identify the pathway(s) causing the
arrhythmia, and then eliminates it (them) with bursts
of high-frequency radio waves. Surgical ablation is
performed in an operating room under general
anesthesia. Computerized mapping techniques are
combined with a cold probe to destroy arrhythmiacausing tissue. Ablation is generally successful. When
ablation is used for atrial fibrillation, it is usually
followed by implantation of a pacemaker as well as
drug therapy.A pacemaker is a battery-powered device about the
size of a matchbox that is surgically implanted near the
collarbone to regulate the heart beat. Lead wires
threaded to the right side of the heart supply electrical
energy to pace the atria and ventricles. The implantable
cardioverter defibrillator is a treatment for serious
arrhythmias. The battery-powered device senses an
abnormal heart rhythm and automatically provides electrical shock(s). The shock(s) suspends heart activity and
then allows the heart to initiate a normal rhythm. Wire
electrodes on the device are attached to the heart. Some
of the electrodes are attached to the outside of the heart
and some are attached to the inside of the heart through
veins. The newest implantable cardioverter defibrillators
can be implanted in the chest wall and do not require
open chest surgery. These devices weigh less than 10 oz
and generally last seven or eight years. An implantable
cardioverter defibrillator is usually used with drug therapy, but the amount medication is reduced. In maze
surgery, often the last resort, surgeons create a maze of
stitches (sutures) that help the heart’s electrical impulses
travel effectively.
Most of the drugs used for treatment have potential side effects and should be carefully monitored by a
doctor. The goal of treatment is to control the rate and
rhythm of the heart and to prevent the formation of
blood clots. If the arrhythmia is caused by heart disease, the heart disease will also be treated. The
American Heart Association recommends aggressive
treatment.
A digitalis drug, most commonly digoxin, is
usually prescribed to control the heart rate. Digitalis
drugs slow the heart’s electrical impulses, helping to
restore the normal rate and rhythm. These drugs also
increase the ability of the heart’s muscular layer to
contract and pump properly. Beta-blockers and
calcium channel blockers can also be used for this
purpose. Beta-blockers slow the speed of electrical
impulses through the heart. Some calcium channel
blockers dampen the heart’s response to erratic electrical impulses.
To prevent blood clots, aspirin or warfarin
(Coumadin) is administered. Warfarin, however, has
potential bleeding side effects, especially in older
patients. Amiodarone is fairly efffective for atrial flutter. This drug is often able to maintain the heart’s
proper rhythm and can also help control the heart
rate when the flutter occurs.
Prognosis
Patients with atrial fibrillation and flutter can
live a normal life for many years as long as the
arrhythmia is controlled and serious blood clots
are prevented.
Prevention
Atrial fibrillation and flutter can sometimes be
prevented when the cause can be identified and controlled. Depending on the cause, prevention could
include:
 treating the underlying heart disease
 reducing stress and anxiety
 reducing or stopping consumption of caffeine, alcohol, or tobacco; and/or
 discontinuing diet pills or other medications (overthe-counter or prescription)