Definition
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
is a developmental disorder characterized by distractibility, hyperactivity, impulsive behaviors, and the
inability to remain focused on tasks or activities.
Description
ADHD, also known as hyperkinetic disorder
(HKD) outside of the United States, is estimated to
affect 3-9% of children, and afflicts boys more often
than girls. Although difficult to assess in infancy and
toddlerhood, signs of ADHD may begin to appear as
early as age two or three, but the symptom picture
changes as adolescence approaches. Many symptoms,
particularly hyperactivity, diminish in early adulthood, but impulsivity and inattention problems
remain with up to 50% of ADHD individuals
throughout their adult life.
Children with ADHD have short attention
spans, becoming easily bored and/or frustrated
with tasks. Although they may be quite intelligent,
their lack of focus frequently results in poor grades
and difficulties in school. ADHD children act
impulsively, taking action first and thinking later.
They are constantly moving, running, climbing,
squirming, and fidgeting, but often have trouble
with gross and fine motor skills and, as a result,
may be physically clumsy and awkward. Their
clumsiness may extend to the social arena, where
they are sometimes shunned due to their impulsive
and intrusive behavior.
Causes and symptoms
The causes of ADHD are not known. However,
it appears that heredity plays a major role in the
development of ADHD. Children with an ADHD
parent or sibling are more likely to develop the
disorder themselves. In 2004, scientists reported at
least 20 candidate genes that might contribute to
ADHD, but no single gene stood out as the gene
causing the condition. Before birth, ADHD children
may have been exposed to poor maternal nutrition,
viral infections, or maternal substance abuse. In
early childhood, exposure to lead or other toxins
can cause ADHD-like symptoms. Traumatic brain
injury or neurological disorders may also trigger
ADHD symptoms. Although the exact cause of
ADHD is not known, an imbalance of certain neurotransmitters, the chemicals in the brain that transmit messages between nerve cells, is believed to be
the mechanism behind ADHD symptoms.
A widely publicized study conducted by Dr. Ben
Feingold in the early 1970s suggested that allergies to
certain foods and food additives caused the characteristic hyperactivity of ADHD children. Although some
children may have adverse reactions to certain foods
that can affect their behavior (for example, a rash
might temporarily cause a child to be distracted from
other tasks), carefully controlled follow-up studies
have uncovered no link between food allergies and
 ADHD. Another popularly held misconception
about food and ADHD is that the consumption of
sugar causes hyperactive behavior. Again, studies
have shown no link between sugar intake and
 ADHD. It is important to note, however, that a nutritionally balanced diet is important for normal development in all children.
Psychologists and other mental health professionals typically use the criteria listed in the Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV) as a guideline for determining the
presence of ADHD. For a diagnosis of ADHD, DSMIV requires the presence of at least six of the following
symptoms of inattention, or six or more symptoms of
hyperactivity and impulsivity combined:
Inattention:
 fails to pay close attention to detail or makes careless
mistakes in schoolwork or other activities
 has difficulty sustaining attention in tasks or
activities
 does not appear to listen when spoken to
 does not follow through on instructions and does not
finish tasks
 has difficulty organizing tasks and activities
 avoids or dislikes tasks that require sustained mental
effort (e.g., homework)
 is easily distracted
 is forgetful in daily activities
Hyperactivity:
 fidgets with hands or feet or squirms in seat
 does not remain seated when expected to
 runs or climbs excessively when inappropriate (in
adolescents and adults, feelings of restlessness)
 has difficulty playing quietly
 is constantly on the move
 talks excessively
Impulsivity:
 blurts out answers before the question has been
completed
 has difficulty waiting for his or her turn
 interrupts and/or intrudes on others
Diagnosis
The first step in determining if a child has ADHD
is to consult with a pediatrician. The pediatrician can
make an initial evaluation of the child’s developmental
maturity compared to other children in his or her age
group. The physician should also perform a comprehensive physical examination to rule out any organic
causes of ADHD symptoms, such as an overactive
thyroid or vision or hearing problems.
If no organic problem can be found, a psychologist, psychiatrist, neurologist, neuropsychologist, or
learning specialist is typically consulted to perform a
comprehensive ADHD assessment. A complete medical, family, social, psychiatric, and educational history
is compiled from existing medical and school records
and from interviews with parents and teachers.
Interviews may also be conducted with the child,
depending on his or her age. Along with these interviews, several clinical inventories may also be used,
such as the Conners Rating Scales (Teacher’s
Questionnaire and Parent’s Questionnaire), Child
Behavior Checklist (CBCL), and the Achenbach
Child Behavior Rating Scales. These inventories provide valuable information on the child’s behavior in
different settings and situations. In addition, the
Wender Utah Rating Scale has been adapted for use
in diagnosing ADHD in adults.
It is important to note that mental disorders such
as depression and anxiety disorder can cause symptoms similar to ADHD. A complete and comprehensive psychiatric assessment is critical to differentiate
ADHD from other possible mood and behavioral disorders. Bipolar disorder, for example, may be misdiagnosed as ADHD.
Public schools are required by federal law to offer
free ADHD testing upon request. A pediatrician can
also provide a referral to a psychologist or pediatric
specialist for ADHD assessment. Parents should
check with their insurance plans to see if these services
are covered.
Treatment
Psychosocial therapy, usually combined with
medications, is the treatment approach of choice to
alleviate ADHD symptoms. Psychostimulants, such
as dextroamphetamine (Dexedrine), pemoline
(Cylert), and methylphenidate (Ritalin) are commonly
prescribed to control hyperactive and impulsive behavior and increase attention span. They work by stimulating the production of certain neurotransmitters in
the brain. Possible side effects of stimulants include
nervous tics, irregular heartbeat, loss of appetite, and
insomnia. However, the medications are usually welltolerated and safe in most cases. In 2004, longer-acting
stimulants had been released to treat adult ADHD.
In 2004, the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry listed the first nonstimulant as a
first-line therapy for ADHD. Called atomoxetine HCI
(Strattera), it is a norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor.
In children who do not respond well to stimulant
therapy, tricyclic antidepressants such as desipramine
(Norpramin, Pertofane) and amitriptyline (Elavil) are
sometimes recommended. Reported side effects of
these drugs include persistent dry mouth, sedation,
disorientation, and cardiac arrhythmia (particularly
with desipramine). Other medications prescribed for
ADHD therapy include buproprion (Wellbutrin), an
antidepressant; fluoxetine (Prozac), an SSRI antidepressant; and carbamazepine (Tegretol, Atretol), an
anticonvulsant drug. Clonidine (Catapres), an antihypertensive medication, has also been used to control
aggression and hyperactivity in some ADHD children,
although it should not be used with Ritalin. A child’s
response to medication will change with age and
maturation, so ADHD symptoms should be monitored closely and prescriptions adjusted accordingly.
Behavior modification therapy uses a reward system to reinforce good behavior and task completion
and can be implemented both in the classroom and at
home. A tangible reward such as a sticker may be
given to the child every time he completes a task or
behaves in an acceptable manner. A chart system may
be used to display the stickers and visually illustrate
the child’s progress. When a certain number of stickers
are collected, the child may trade them in for a bigger
reward such as a trip to the zoo or a day at the beach.
The reward system stays in place until the good behavior becomes ingrained.
A variation of this technique, cognitive-behavioral
therapy, works to decrease impulsive behavior by getting the child to recognize the connection between
thoughts and behavior, and to change behavior by
changing negative thinking patterns.
Individual psychotherapy can help an ADHD
child build self-esteem, give them a place to discuss
their worries and anxieties, and help them gain insight
into their behavior and feelings. Family therapy may
also be beneficial in helping family members develop
coping skills and in working through feelings of guilt
or anger parents may be experiencing.
ADHD children perform better within a familiar,
consistent, and structured routine with positive reinforcements for good behavior and real consequences
for bad. Family, friends, and caretakers should all be
educated on the special needs and behaviors of the
ADHD child. Communication between parents and
teachers is especially critical to ensuring an ADHD
child has an appropriate learning environment.
Alternative treatment
A number of alternative treatments exist for
 ADHD. Although there is a lack of controlled studies
to prove their efficacy, proponents report that they are
successful in controlling symptoms in some ADHD
patients. Some of the more popular alternative treatments include:
 EEG (electroencephalograph) biofeedback. By measuring brainwave activity and teaching the ADHD
patient which type of brainwave is associated with
attention, EEG biofeedback attempts to train
patients to generate the desired brainwave activity.
 Dietary therapy. Based in part on the Feingold food
allergy diet, dietary therapy focuses on a nutritional
plan that is high in protein and complex carbohydrates and free of white sugar and salicylate-containing foods such as strawberries, tomatoes, and grapes.
 Herbal therapy. Herbal therapy uses a variety of
natural remedies to address the symptoms of
ADHD, such as ginkgo (Gingko biloba) for memory
and mental sharpness and chamomile (Matricaria
recutita) extract for calming. The safety of herbal
remedies has not been demonstrated in controlled
studies. For example, it is known that gingko may
affect blood coagulation, but controlled studies have
not yet evaluated the risk of the effect.
 Homeopathic medicine. The theory of homeopathic
medicine is to treat the whole person at a core level.
Constitutional homeopathic care requires consulting
with a well-trained homeopath who has experience
working with ADD and ADHD individuals.
Prognosis
Untreated, ADHD negatively affects a child’s
social and educational performance and can seriously
damage his or her sense of self-esteem. ADHD children have impaired relationships with their peers, and
may be looked upon as social outcasts. They may be
perceived as slow learners or troublemakers in the
classroom. Siblings and even parents may develop
resentful feelings towards the ADHD child.
Some ADHD children also develop a conduct
disorder problem. For those adolescents who have
both ADHD and a conduct disorder, as many as 25%
go on to develop antisocial personality disorder and
the criminal behavior, substance abuse, and high rate
of suicide attempts that are symptomatic of it.
Children diagnosed with ADHD are also more likely
to have a learning disorder, a mood disorder such as
depression, or an anxiety disorder.
Approximately 70-80% of ADHD patients treated with stimulant medication experience significant
relief from symptoms, at least in the short-term.
Approximately one-half of ADHD children seem to
‘‘outgrow’’ the disorder in adolescence or early adulthood; the other half will retain some or all symptoms
of ADHD as adults. With early identification and
intervention, careful compliance with a treatment
program, and a supportive and nurturing home and
school environment, ADHD children can flourish
socially and academically.