Definition
Auditory integration training, or AIT, is one specific type of music/auditory therapy based upon the
work of French otolaryngologists Dr. Alfred Tomatis
and Dr. Guy Berard.
Origins
The premise upon which most auditory integration programs are based is that distortion in how
things are heard contributes to commonly seen
behavioral or learning disorders in children. Some
of these disorders include attention deficit/hyperactive disorder (ADHD), autism, dyslexia, and central
auditory processing disorders (CAPD). Training the
patient to listen can stimulate central and cortical
organization.
Auditory integration is one facet of what audiologists call central auditory processing. The simplest
definition of central auditory processing, or CAP, is
University of Buffalo Professor of Audiology Jack
Katz’s, which is: ‘‘What we do with what we hear.’’
Central auditory integration is actually the perception
of sound, including the ability to attend to sound, to
remember it, retaining it in both the long- and shortterm memory, to be able to listen to sound selectively,
and to localize it.
Guy Berard developed one of the programs commonly used. Berard’s auditory integration training
consists of twenty half-hour sessions spent listening
to musical sounds via a stereophonic system. The
music is random, with filtered frequencies, and the
person listens through earphones. These sound waves
vibrate and exercise structures in the middle ear. This
is normally done in sessions twice a day for 10 days.
Alfred Tomatis is also the inventor of the
Electronic Ear. This device operates through a series
of filters, and reestablishes the dominance of the right
ear in hearing. The basis of Tomatis’ work is a series of
principles that follow:
 The most important purpose of the ear is to adapt
sound waves into signals that charge the brain.
 Sound is conducted via both air and bone. It can be
considered something that nourishes the nervous
system, either stimulating or destimulating it.
 Just as seeing is not the same as looking, hearing is not
the same as listening. Hearing is passive. Listening is
active.
 A person’s ability to listen affects all language development for that person. This process influences every
aspect of self-image and social development.
 The capacity to listen can be changed or improved
through auditory stimulation using musical and
vocal sounds at high frequencies.
 Communication begins in the womb. As early as the
beginning of the second trimester, fetuses can hear
sounds. These sounds literally cause the brain and
nervous system of the baby to develop.
Description
A quartet of CAP defects have been identified that
can unfavorably alter how each person processes
sound. Among these are:
 Phonetic decoding, a problem that occurs when the
brain incorrectly decodes what is being heard.
Sounds are unrecognizable, often because the person
speaking talks too fast.
 Tolerance-fading memory, a condition with little or
poor tolerance for background sounds.
 Auditory integration involves a person’s ability to
put together things heard with things seen.
Characteristically there are long response delays
and trouble with phonics, or recognizing the symbols
for sounds.
 The fourth problem area, often called auditory organization, overlaps the previous three. It is characterized by disorganization in handling auditory and
other information.
Certain audiological tests are carried out to see if
the person has a CAP problem, and if so, how severe it
is. Other tests give more specific information regarding the nature of the CAP problem. They include:
 Puretone air-conduction threshold testing, which measures peripheral hearing loss. If loss is found, then
bone-conduction testing, or evaluation of the vibration of small bones in the inner ear, is also carried out.
 Word discrimination scores (WDS) determines a person’s clarity in hearing ideal speech. This is done by
presenting 25–50 words at 40 decibels above the
person’s average sound threshold in each ear. Test
scores equal the percentage of words heard correctly.
 Immittance testing is made up of two parts, assessing
the status of, and the protective mechanisms of the
middle ear.
 Staggered sporadic word (SSW) testing delivers 40
compound words in an overlapping way at 50 decibels above threshold to each ear of the person being
tested. This test provides expanded information that
makes it possible to break down CAP problems into
the four basic types.
 Speech in noise discrimination (SN) testing is similar
to Staggered Sporadic Word testing except that other
noise is also added and the percentage correct in
quiet is compared with that correct when there is
added noise.
 Phonemic synthesis (PS) determines serious learning
problems. The types of errors made in sounding out
written words or associating written letters with the
sounds they represent help in determining the type
and severity of CAP problems.
Purpose
Upon completion of an auditory integration
training program, the person’s hearing should be capable of perceiving all frequencies at, or near, the same
level. Total improvement from this therapy, in both
hearing and behavior, can take up to one year.
Research and general acceptance
Auditory integration training is based upon newly
learned information about the brain. Though brain
structures and connections are predetermined, probably by heredity, another factor called plasticity also
comes into play. Learning, we now know, continues
from birth to death. Plasticity is the ability of the brain
to actually change its structuring and connections
through the process of learning.
Problems with auditory processing are now
viewed as having a wide–reaching ripple effect on our
society. It is estimated that 30–40% of children starting school have language-learning skills that can be
described as poor. CAP difficulties are a factor in
several different learning disabilities. They affect not
only academic success, but also nearly every aspect of
societal difficulties. One example to illustrate this is a
1989 University of Buffalo study where CAP problems
were found to be present in a surprising 97% of youth
inmates in an upstate New York corrections facility.
