Definition
Autism is a severe disorder of brain function
marked by problems with social contact, intelligence
and language, together with ritualistic or compulsive
behavior and bizarre responses to the environment.
Description
Autism is a lifelong disorder that interferes with
the ability to understand what is seen, heard, and
touched. This can cause profound problems in personal behavior and in the ability to relate to others. A
person with autism must learn how to communicate
normally and how to relate to people, objects and
events. However, not all patients suffer the same
degree of impairment. There is a full spectrum of
symptoms, which can range from mild to severe.
Autism occurs in as many as one or two per 1,000
children. It is found four times more often in boys
(usually the first-born) and occurs around the world
in all races and social backgrounds. Autism usually is
evident in the first three years of life, although in some
children it’s hard to tell when the problem develops.
Sometimes the condition isn’t diagnosed until the
child enters school.
While a person with autism can have symptoms
ranging from mild to severe, about 10% have an
extraordinary ability in one area, such as in mathematics, memory, music, or art. Such children are
known as ‘‘autistic savants’’ (formerly known as
‘‘idiot savants.’’).
Causes and symptoms
Autism is a brain disorder that affects the way the
brain uses or transmits information. Studies have
found abnormalities in several parts of the brain that
almost certainly occurred during fetal development.
The problem may be centered in the parts of the
brain responsible for processing language and information from the senses.
There appears to be a strong genetic basis for
autism. Identical twins are more likely to both be
affected than twins who are fraternal (not genetically
identical). In a family with one autistic child, the
chance of having another child with autism is about
1 in 20, much higher than in the normal population.
Sometimes, relatives of an autistic child have mild
behaviors that look very much like autism, such as
repetitive behaviors and social or communication
problems. Research also has found that some emotional disorders (such as manic depression) occur
more often in families of a child with autism.
At least one group of researchers has found a link
between an abnormal gene and autism. The gene may
be just one of at least three to five genes that interact in
some way to cause the condition. Scientists suspect
that a faulty gene or genes might make a person vulnerable to develop autism in the presence of other
factors, such as a chemical imbalance, viruses or chemicals, or a lack of oxygen at birth.
In a few cases, autistic behavior is caused by a
disease such as:
 rubella in the pregnant mother
 tuberous sclerosis
 fragile X syndrome
 encephalitis
 untreated phenylketonuria
The severity of the condition varies between individuals, ranging from the most severe (extremely unusual, repetitive, self- injurious, and aggressive
behavior) to very mild, resembling a personality disorder with some learning disability.
Profound problems with social interaction are the
most common symptoms of autism. Infants with the
disorder won’t cuddle; they avoid eye contact and
don’t seem to want or need physical contact or affection. They may become rigid or flaccid when they are
held, cry when picked up, and show little interest in
human contact. Such a child doesn’t smile or lift his
arms in anticipation of being picked up. He forms no
attachment to parents nor shows any normal anxiety
toward strangers. He doesn’t learn typical games of
childhood, such as peek-a-boo.
Language problems
The child with autism may not speak at all; if he
does, it is often in single words. He may endlessly
repeat words or phrases that are addressed to him
and may reverse pronouns (‘‘You go sleep’’ instead
of ‘‘I want to go to sleep’’).
Restricted interests and activity
Usually a child with autism has many problems
playing normally. He probably won’t act out adultroles
during play time, and instead of enjoying fantasy play,
he may simply repeatedly mimic the actions of someone
else. Bizarre behavior patterns are very common among
autistic children and may include complex rituals,
screaming fits, rhythmic rocking, arm flapping, finger
twiddling, and crying without tears. Autistic children
may play with their own saliva, feces or urine.They
may be self-destructive, biting their own hands, gouging
at their eyes, pulling their hair, or banging their head.
Sensory problems
The sensory world poses a real problem to many
autistic children, who seem overwhelmed by their own
senses.A child with autism may ignore objects or become
obsessed with them, continually watching the object
or the movement of his fingers over it. Many of these
children may react to sounds by banging their head
or flapping fingers. Some high-functioning autistic
adults who have written books about their childhood
experiences report that sounds were often excruciatingly
painful to them, forcing them to withdraw from their
environment or try to cope by withdrawing into their
own world of sensation and movement.
Intellectual problems
Most autistic children appear to be moderately
mentally retarded. They may giggle or cry for no
reason, have no fear of real danger, but exhibit terror
of harmless objects.
Diagnosis
There is no medical test for autism. Because the
symptoms of autism are so varied, the condition may
go undiagnosed for some time (especially in those with
mild cases or if other handicaps are also present).
It may be confused with other diseases, such as fragile
X syndrome, tuberous sclerosis, and untreated
phenylketonuria.
Autism is diagnosed by observing the child’s
behavior, communication skills, and social interactions. Medical tests should rule out other possible
causes of autistic symptoms. Criteria that mental
health experts use to diagnose autism include:
 problems with developing friendships
 problems with make-believe or social play
 endlessly repeated words or strings of words
 difficulty in carrying on a conversation
 obsessions with rituals or restricted patterns
 preoccupation with parts of objects
Some children have a few of the symptoms of
autism, but not enough to be diagnosed with the
‘‘classical’’ form of the condition. Children who have
autistic behavior but no problems with language may
be diagnosed with ‘‘Asperger syndrome.’’ Children
who seem normal at first but who begin to show
autistic behavior as they get older might be diagnosed
with ‘‘childhood disintegrative disorder’’ (CDD).
These problems are sometimes called ‘‘autistic spectrum disorders.’’ It is also important to rule out other
problems that seem similar to autism.
Treatment
There is no cure for autism. Treatments are
aimed at reducing specific symptoms. Because the
symptoms vary so widely from one person to the
next, there is not a single approach that works for
every person. A spectrum of interventions include
training in music, listening, vision, speech and language, and senses. Special diets and medications may
also be prescribed.
Studies show that people with autism can improve
significantly with proper treatment. A child with autism can learn best with special teachers in a
structured program that emphasizes individual
instruction. The two most-often studied types of treatment are:
Educational or behavioral treatment
Typically, behavioral techniques are used to help
the child respond and decrease symptoms. This might
include positive reinforcement (food and rewards) to
boost language and social skills. This training includes
structured, skill-oriented instruction designed to boost
social and language abilities. Training needs to begin
as early as possible, since early intervention appears to
influence brain development.
Most experts believe that modern treatment is
most effective when carried out at home, although
treatment may also take place in a psychiatric hospital, specialized school, or day care program.
Medication
No single medication has yet proved highly effective for the major features of autism. However, a
variety of drugs can control self-injurious, aggressive,
and other of the more difficult behaviors. Drugs also
can control epilepsy, which afflicts up to 20% of people with autism.
Five types of drugs are sometimes prescribed to
help the behavior problems of people with autism:
 stimulants, such as methylphenidate (Ritalin)
 antidepressants, such as fluroxamine (Luvox)
 opiate blockers, such as naltrexone (ReVia)
  antipsychotics
 tranquilizers.
Today, most experts recommend a complex treatment regimen that begins early and continues through
the teenage years. Behavioral therapies are used in
conjunction with medications.
Alternative treatment
Many parents report success with megavitamin
therapy. Some studies have shown that vitamin B6
improves eye contact and speech and lessens tantrum
behavior. Vitamin B6 causes fewer side effects than
other medications and is considered safe when used
in appropriate doses. However, not many health practitioners advocate its use in the treatment of autism,
citing that the studies showing its benefit were flawed.
DMG (dimethylglycine)
This compound, available in many health food
stores, is legally classified as a food, not a vitamin or
drug. Some researchers claim that it improves speech
in children with autism. Those who respond to this
treatment will usually do so within a week. Again,
many doctors do not feel that the studies are adequate
to promote this treatment.
Exercise
One researcher found that vigorous exercise (20
minutes or longer, three or four days a week) seems to
decrease hyperactivity, aggression, self-injury and
other autistic symptoms.
Prognosis
While there is no cure, with appropriate treatment
the negative behaviors of autism may improve. Earlier
generations placed autistic children in institutions;
today, even severely disabled children can be helped in
a less restrictive environment to develop to their highest
potential. Many can eventually become more responsive to others as they learn to understand the world
around them, and some can lead nearly normal lives.
People with autism have a normal life expectancy.
Some people with autism can handle a job; they do
best with structured jobs that involve a degree of
repetition.
Prevention
Until the cause of autism is discovered, prevention
is not possible.