Definition
Also known as aerospace medicine, flight medicine, or space medicine, aviation medicine is a medical specialty that focuses on the physical and
psychological conditions associated with flying and
space travel.
Purpose
Since flying airplanes and spacecraft involves
great risk and physical demands, such as changes in
gravity and oxygen, pilots and astronauts need medical experts to protect their safety and the public’s
safety.Description
Pressure changes
In the United States, the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) requires all pilots who fly
above 14,500 ft (4,420 m) to be prepared for pressure
changes caused by lower oxygen levels at high altitude.
Pilots must either have a pressurized cabin or access to
an oxygen mask. Without these protections, they
could experience hypoxia, or altitude sickness.
Hypoxia reduces the amount of oxygen in the brain,
causing such symptoms as dizziness, shortness of
breath, and mental confusion. These symptoms
could cause the pilot to lose control of the plane.
Hypoxia can be treated with oxygen therapy.
Rapid altitude increases and decreases can cause
pain because there is an air pocket in the middle portion of the ear. To equalize pressure in the ear, physicians typically advise pilots and passengers to clear
their sinuses by plugging their nose and blowing until
the eardrums ‘‘pop.’’ Other options include yawning,
swallowing or chewing gum. For people with a cold or
a severely blocked middle ear, the use of decongestants,
antihistamines, or nasal sprays may help. Without taking steps to equalize pressure, the tympanic membrane
could rupture, causing hearing loss, vertigo, dizziness,
and nausea.
Gravity’s impact
Fighter pilots who fly high-performance jets can
experience health problems during rapid acceleration
and when executing tight turns at high speed. During
these moves, a pilot experiences extreme gravity conditions that can pull blood away from the brain and
heart and into the lower body. This can cause the pilot
to have tunnel vision or pass out. To prevent these
potentially deadly situations, the military requires
fighter pilots to wear special flight suits, or G suits,
which have compartments that fill with air or fluid to
keep blood from pooling in the lower body.
Some pilots, like the Blue Angels, use a technique
called the Valsalva Maneuver instead of G suits to
prevent black outs during high-performance flying.
The Valsalva Maneuver involves grunting and tightening the abdominal muscles to stop blood from
collecting in the wrong parts of the body.
PREVENTIVE CARE. Since any routine health problem that affects a pilot could mean the loss of
hundreds of lives, aviation medicine specialists who
work for commercial airlines and the military take
special care to educate pilots about proper diet,
exercise and preventive health tools. For example,
physicians may frequently screen pilots for vision
changes caused by glaucoma or cataracts. They
also will check for hearing loss and encourage the
pilot to wear earplugs or headphones to buffer
engine noise. To monitor for heart disease, physicians will check blood pressure and may order diagnostic tests such as an ECG or stress test.
Motion sickness
Many people experience nausea, vertigo, and disorientation when they first arrive in space. This is
caused by changes in the fluid in the inner ear, which
is sensitive to gravity and affects our sense of spatial
orientation. The symptoms typically ease after several
days, but often recur when the astronaut returns to
Earth. To treat this condition, physicians give astronauts motion sickness medication, such as lorazepam.
Bone and muscle loss
In zero-gravity conditions, astronauts lose bone
and muscle mass. On earth, the natural resistance of
gravity helps build stronger muscles and bones during
normal weight-bearing activities like walking or even
sitting at a desk. In space, however, astronauts must
work harder to prevent bone and muscle loss. Exercise
is an important treatment. Crew members may use an
exercise cycle or resistive rubber bands to stay in
shape. Physicians also may give them medication to
prevent bone loss and prescribe nutritional supplements, such as a mixture of essential amino acids and
carbohydrates, to limit muscle atrophy.Radiation
Another health threat to space travelers is radiation. Harmful rays can alter the DNA in human cells
and cause cancer. Excess radiation also can weaken
the immune system. To prevent these problems, physicians may give astronauts nutritional supplements.
For example, research has show that n-3 fatty acids
found in fish oil reduce DNA damage.
Cardiovascular issues
When astronauts return to earth after a long mission, they tend to feel dizzy and black out. Scientists are
concerned about this dilemma because it could be dangerous if the crew members need to make an emergency
exit. One way to prevent this problem, which is caused
by a drop in blood pressure, is to have the astronauts
drink extra fluids and increase salt intake to increase
blood volume. Physicians also may prescribe medication
that causes blood vessels to contract. As another precaution, astronauts also put on protective flight suits, or
G suits, before they re-enter the earth’s atmosphere.