 Definition
 Bacterial vaginosis (BV) is a type of vaginal infec
tion in which the normal balance of bacteria in the
 vaginaisdisrupted,allowingtheovergrowthofharmful
 anaerobic bacteriaatthe expenseofprotective bacteria.
 Description
 BVis the most, common and the most serious type
 of vaginal infection in women of childbearing age. As
 many as 10 to 26 percent of pregnant women in the
 United States have BV; BV has been found in 12 to 25
 percent of womeninroutineclinicpopulations, and in32
 to 64 percent of womeninclinics for sexually transmitted
 diseases (STDs). BV is different than vaginal yeast infec
tions and requires different methods of treatment.
 In most cases, BV does not have lasting effects on
 women.However,there canbe risks associated with BV:
 Causes and symptoms
 Bacteria that dominate the vaginal flora in a BV
 infection include Gardnerella vaginalis or Mobiluncus,
 although other bacteria, such as Escherichia coli from
 the rectum have also been shown to cause the disease.
 The overgrowth of these harmful bacteria are at the
 expense of the protective bacteria lactobacilli, which
 secrete a natural disinfectant, hydrogen peroxide, that
 maintains the healthy, normal balance of vaginal
 microorganisms. The factors that upset the normal
 balance of bacteria in the vagina are not well-under
stood; however, the following activities or behaviors
 that have been associated with BV include:
 having a new sex partner or multiple sex partners
 stress
 douching
 using an intrauterine device (IUD) for contraception
 BV is not transmitted through toilet seats, bed
ding, swimming pools, or touching of objects. Women
 who have not had sexual intercourse rarely have BV.
 However BV is not considered an STD, although it
 doesappeartoactlikeanSTDinwomenwhohavesex
 with women.
 The main symptom of BV is a thin, watery or
 foamy, white (milky) or gray vaginal discharge with
 an unpleasant, foul, fish-like or musty odor. The odor
 is sometimes stronger after a woman has sex, when the
 semen mixes with the vaginal secretions. Burning or pain during urination can also be present with BV.
 Itching on the outside of the vagina and redness can
 also occur, but are seen less frequently. However,
 many women with BV do not exhibit any symptoms.
 Diagnosis
 BV is diagnosed through a examination of the
 vagina by a health care provider. A woman who sus
pects that she mayhaveBVshouldnotdoucheorusea
 feminine hygiene spray before the appointment with
 the health care provider. Laboratory tests are con
ducted on a sample of the vaginal fluid to see if the
 bacteria present are those associated with BV. The
 health care provider may also check to see if there is
 decreased vaginal acidity. Potassium hydroxide, when
 added to avaginal discharge sample, enhances vaginal
 odors andallowsthehealthcareprovidertodetermine
 if the odor is fishy or foul.
 Treatment
 In a few cases, BV might clear up without treat
ment. However, all women with symptoms of BV
 should be treated to relieve symptoms and to avoid
 thedevelopmentofcomplicationssuchaspelvicinflam
matory disease (PID). In most cases, male partners are
 not treated, but femalesexual partners should be exam
ined to see if they have BV and require treatment.
 BV is treated with prescription antibiotics such as
 metronidazoleorclindamycincreamsororalmetronida
zole (both are antibiotics that can also be used by preg
nantwomen,althoughatdifferentdoses).Metronidazole
 kills anaerobic bacteria but does not harm the protective
 lactobacilli. Drinking alcohol should be avoided when
 taking metronidazole, for this medicine can cause severe
 nausea and vomiting when combined with alcohol.
 For postmenopausal women, in addition to the
 use of antibiotics, the health care provider may also
 prescribe estrogen suppositories or topical cream to
 thicken and lubricate vaginal tissues. Sexual activity
 should be avoided during treatment; a condom should
 be used if the woman does have sexual intercourse.  
 The woman should be tested after treatment to ensure
 that the infection has been cured.
 Alternative treatment
 Supplement therapies are available in addition to
 the use of prescription medicines to ease recovery.
 Herbal therapies
 Fresh garlic (Allium sativum) has antibacterial
 properties and can be added to a woman’s diet. A
 fresh, peeled garlic wrapped in gauze can also be
 inserted into the vagina to help treat BV. The insert
 should be changed twice daily.
 To soothe itching or irritation of the vaginal tis
sues, a woman can bathe the tissues in an infusion of
 fresh chickweed (Stellaria media). The infusion is
 made by pouring one cup of boiling water on one to
 two teaspoons of the herb, steeping for five minutes,
 and allowing the mixture to cool before use.
 Prognosis
 PregnantwomenwithBVoftenhavebabiesoflowbirth
 weight (less than 5.5 pounds) or who arepremature
 Bacteria that cause BV may also cause pelvic inflam
matory disease (PID), an infection of the uterus and
 fallopian tubes. The risk of a woman with BV devel
oping PID is higher after the woman undergoes sur
gical procedures such as a hysterectomy or an
 abortion. PID can result in infertility and can also
 increase the risk of an ectopic pregnancy
 BV may increase the risk of a woman becoming
 infected with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS
 A woman with BV and HIV is more likely to pass
 HIV to her sexual partner
 BV increases the chance that a woman will contract
 other STDs, such as chlamydia and gonorrhea
 BVcanbesuccessfullytreatedwithantibiotics.
 practicing abstinence
 delaying having sex for the first time, as younger
 people who have sex are more likely to contract BV
 and STDs
 limiting the number of sexual partners
 having a sexual relationship with only one partner
 who does not have an STD
 practicing safer sex, which means using a condom
 every time when having sex
 Since the development of BV often appears to be
 associated with sexual activities, recommended ways
 to avoid BV include:
 Other ways to prevent BV include:
 discontinuing the use of tampons for six months
 practicing good hygiene by wiping from front to
 back (away from the vagina) after bowel movements
 to avoid spreading bacteria from the rectum to the
 vagina
 wearing cotton panties and panty-hose with a cotton
 crotch and avoiding tight or latex clothing to keep
 the vagina cool and dry
 avoiding the use of perfumed soaps and feminine
 sprays
 lowering stress levels
 avoiding douching, as douching removes some of the
 normal bacteria in the vagina that protects women
 from infection
 finishing the course of antibiotic treatment, even if
 the symptoms are relieved, to prevent reoccurrence
 of the disease
 routinely being tested for BV during regular gyneco
logical examinations
 Some physicians recommend that all women who
 have a hysterectomy or an abortion be treated for BV,
 to reduce the risk of developing PID.