 Definition
 Bacteremia is an invasion of the bloodstream by
 bacteria.
 Description
 Bacteremia occurs when bacteria enter the
 bloodstream. This may occur through a wound or
 infection, or through a surgical procedure or injec
tion. Bacteremia maycausenosymptomsandresolve
 without treatment, or it may produce fever and other
 symptoms of infection. In some cases, bacteremia
 leads to septic shock, a potentially life-threatening
 condition.
 Causes and symptoms
 Causes
 Several types of bacteria live on the surface of the
 skin or colonize the moist linings of the urinary tract,
 lower digestive tract, and other internal surfaces. These
 bacteria are normally harmless as long as they are kept
 in check bythe body’s natural barriers and the immune
 system. People in good health with strong immune
 systems rarely develop bacteremia. However, when
 bacteria are introduced directly into the circulatory
 system, especially in a person who is ill or undergoing
 aggressive medical treatment, the immune system may
 not be able to cope with the invasion, and symptoms of
 bacteremia may develop. For this reason, bacteremia is
 most commoninpeoplewhoarealready affected by or
 being treated for some other medical problem. In addi
tion, medical treatment may bring a person in contact
 with new types of bacteria that are more invasive than
 those already residing in that person’s body, further
 increasing the likelihood of bacterial infection.
 Conditions which increase the chances of devel
oping bacteremia include:
 immune suppression, either due to HIV infection or
 drug therapy
 antibiotic therapy which changes the balance of bac
terial types in the body
 prolonged or severe illness
 alcoholism or other drug abuse
 malnutrition
 diseases or drug therapy that cause ulcers in the
 intestines, e.g. chemotherapy for cancer
 Commonimmediate causes of bacteremia include:
 drainage of an abscess, including an abscessed tooth
 urinary tract infection, especially in the presence of a
 bladder catheter
 decubitus ulcers (pressure sores)
 intravenous procedures using unsterilized needles,
 including IV drug use
 prolonged IV needle placement
 use of ostomy tubes, including gastrostomy (surgically
 makinganewopeningintothestomach),jejunostomy
 (surgically making an opening from the abdominal
 wall into the jejunum), and colostomy (surgically
 creating an articifical opening into the colon).
 Thebacteria most likely to cause bacteremia include
 members of the Staphylococcus, Streptococcus,
 Pseudomonas, Haemophilus, and Esherichia coli (E. coli)
 genera.
 Symptoms
 Symptoms of bacteremia may include:
 fever over 1018F (38.38C)
 chills
 malaise
 abdominal pain
 nausea
 vomiting
 diarrhea
 anxiety
 shortness of breath
 confusion
 Not all of these symptoms are usually present. In
 the elderly, confusionmaybetheonlyprominentsymp
tom.Bacteremia mayleadtosepticshock, whose symp
toms include decreased consciousness, rapid heart and
 breathing rates and multiple organ failures.
 Diagnosis
 Bacteremia is diagnosed by culturing the blood
 for bacteria. Samples may need to be tested several
 times over several hours. Blood analysis may also
 reveal an elevated number of white blood cells.
 Blood pressure is monitored closely; a decline in
 blood pressure may indicate the onset of septic shock.
 Treatment
 Bacteremia may cause no symptoms, but may be
 discovered through a blood test for another condition.
 In this situation, it may not need to be treated, except
 in patients especially at risk for infection, such as those
 with heart valve defects or whose immune systems are
 suppressed.
 Prognosis
 Promptantibiotic therapy usually succeeds in clear
ing bacteria from the bloodstream. Recurrence may
 indicate an undiscovered site of infection. Untreated
 bacteria in the blood may spread, causing infection of
 the heart (endocarditis or pericarditis) or infection of the
 covering of the central nervous system (meningitis).
 Prevention
 Bacteremia can be prevented by preventing the
 infections which often precede it. Good personal
 hygiene, especially during viral illness, may reduce the
 risk ofdevelopingbacterialinfection.Treatingbacterial
 infections quickly and thoroughlycanminimizetherisk
 of spreading infection. During medical procedures, the
 burden falls on medical professionals to minimize the
 number and duration of invasive procedures, to reduce
 patients’ exposure to sources of bacteria when being
 treated, and to use scrupulous technique.