 Definition
 Balanitis is an inflammation of the head and fore
skin of the penis.
 Description
 Balanitis generally affects uncircumcised males.
 These are men who have a foreskin, which is the
 ‘‘hood’’ of soft skin that partially covers the head of
 the penis. In balanitis, the head and foreskin become
 red and inflamed. (In circumcised men, who lack a
 foreskin, these symptoms only affect the tip of the
 penis.) The condition often occurs due to the fungus
 Candida albicans, the same organism that causes vagi
nal yeast infections in women. Balanitis (which is also
 referred to as balanoposthitis) can be caused by a
 variety of other fungal or bacterial infections, or may
 occur due to a sensitivity reaction to common chemi
cal agents.
 Uncircumcised men are more at risk for balanitis
 due to the presence of the foreskin. The snug fit of the
 foreskin around the top of the penis tends to create a
 damp, warm environment that encourages the growth
 of microorganisms. Most of the organisms associated
 with balanitis are already present on the penis, but in
 very small numbers. However, if the area between the
 head and foreskin is not cleansed thoroughly on a
 regular basis, these organisms can multiply and lead
 to infection.
 Diabetes can increase the risk of developing the
 condition.
 Causes and symptoms
 Balanitis is usually a result of poor hygiene—for
 example, neglecting to bathe for several days. A failure
 toproperlywash(orrinse)theareabetweentheheadand
 foreskin canleadtothedevelopmentoffungalorbacter
ial infections that cause the condition. In other cases,
 balanitis may occur due to an allergic reaction: Some 
  men may be sensitive to chemicals found in harsh soaps,
 laundry detergents, or contraceptive creams. Men who
 contract a sexually transmitted disease (STD) such as
 trichimoniasis may also develop symptoms.
 The symptoms of balanitis are limited to the fore
skin and head of the penis (in circumcised men, only
 the headis affected). These include redness, inflamma
tion, pain, discharge, sore or itchy skin, and difficulty
 retracting the foreskin.
 Diagnosis
 Balanitis is usually diagnosed based on a brief
 physical examination. This may be conducted by
 your regular health care provider or by a urologist,
 the type of doctor who specializes in such disorders.
 Thedoctor maytake asampleofthe discharge (if any)
 to determine the nature of the possible infection. A
 urine test may be recommended to evaluate glucose
 (sugar) levels in the urine. Balanitis treatment is typi
cally covered by medical insurance.
 Treatment
 The treatment of balanitis depends on the specific
 cause, which can varyfromcaseto case. Antibiotics are
 used to treat bacterial infections, while topical antifun
galssuchasclotrimazolecancombatbalanitiscausedby
 Candida.Ifanallergicreactioniscausingsymptoms,the
 goal is to identify the chemical agent responsible.
 Ointmentsorcreamsmaybeusedtoeaseskinirritation.
 Nomatter what the cause, it is important to thor
oughly clean the penis on a daily basis in order to
 alleviate symptoms. If the condition keeps occurring,
 or if the inflammation is interfering with urination,
 circumcision may be advised.
 Alternative treatment
 According to practitioners of alternative medi
cine, certain herbs may be effective in controlling or
 preventing yeast infections–a common cause of bala
nitis. These remedies include garlic, calendula, and
 goldenseal. Eating yogurt that contains acidophilus
 may also help to clear up a Candida infection.
 Prognosis
 Most cases go away quickly once the cause is
 identified and treated. However, regular bouts of bala
nitis can result in urethral stricture.
 Prevention
 Proper hygiene is the best way to avoid balanitis.
 Circumcision is sometimes performed to prevent
 repeated cases.