Definition
 Balloon valvuloplasty is a procedure in which a
 narrowed heart valve is stretched open using a proce
dure that does not require open heart surgery.  
 Purpose
 There are four valves in the heart, which are
 located at the exit of each of the four chambers of
 the heart. They are called aortic valve, pulmonary
 valve, mitral valve, and tricuspid valve. The valves
 open and close to regulate the blood flow from one
 chamber to the next. They are vital to the efficient
 functioning of the heart.
 In some people the valves are too narrow (a con
dition called stenosis). Balloon valvuloplasty is per
formed on children and adults to improve valve
 function and blood flow by enlarging the valve open
ing. It is a treatment for aortic, mitral, and pulmonary
 stenosis. Balloon valvuloplasty has the best results as a
 treatment for narrowed pulmonary valves. Results in
 treating narrowing of the mitral valve are generally
 good. It is more difficult to perform and less successful
 in treating narrowing of the aortic valve.
 Description
 Balloon valvuloplasty is a procedure in which a
 thin tube (catheter) that has asmall deflated balloonat
 the tip is inserted through the skin in the groin area
 into a blood vessel, and then is threaded up to the
 opening of the narrowed heart valve. The balloon is
 inflated, which stretches the valve open. This proce
dure cures many valve obstructions. It is also called
 balloon enlargement of a narrowed heart valve.
 Theprocedureisperformedinacardiaccatheteriza
tionlaboratoryandtakesuptofourhours.Thepatientis
 usually awake, but is given local anesthesia to make the
 area where the catheter is inserted numb. After the site
 where the catheter will be inserted is prepared and
 anesthetized, the cardiologist inserts a catheter into the
 appropriate blood vessel, then passes a balloon-tipped  catheter through the first catheter. Guided by a video
 monitor and an x ray, the physician slowly threads the
 catheter into the heart. The deflated balloon is posi
tioned in the valve opening, then is inflated repeatedly.
 Theinflated balloon widens the valve’s opening by split
ting the valve leaflets apart. Once the valve is widened,
 the balloon-tipped catheteris removed. The othercathe
ter remains in place for 6 to 12 hours because in some
 cases the procedure must be repeated.
 Preparation
 For at least six hours before balloon valvulo
plasty, the patient will have to avoid eating or drinking
 anything. An intravenous line is inserted so that med
ications can be administered. The patient’s groin area
 is shaved and cleaned with an antiseptic. About an
 hour before the procedure, the patient is given an
 oral sedative such as diazepam (Valium).
 Aftercare
 After balloon valvuloplasty, the patient is sent to
 the recovery room for several hours, where he or she is
 monitored for vital signs (such as pulse and breathing)
 and heart sounds. An electrocardiogram, which is a
 record of the electrical impulses in the heart, is done.
 The leg in which the catheter was inserted is tempora
rily prevented from moving. The skin condition is
 monitored. The insertion site, which will be covered
 by asandbag, is observed for bleeding until the cathe
ter is removed. Intravenous fluids will be given to help
 eliminate the x-ray dye; intravenous blood thinners or
 other medications to dilate the coronary arteries may
 be given. Pain medication is available.
 For at least 30 minutes after removal of the cathe
ter, direct pressureisappliedtothesiteofinsertion;after
 this a pressure dressing will be applied. Following dis
chargefromthehospital,the patient can usuallyresume
 normal activities. After balloon valvuloplasty lifelong
 follow-up is necessary because valves sometimes degen
erate or narrowing recurs, making surgery necessary.
 Risks
 Balloon valvuloplasty can have serious complica
tions. For example, the valve can become misshapen so
 that it doesn’t close completely, which makesthe condi
tionworse.Embolism,wherepiecesofthevalvebreakoff
 and travel to the brain or the lungs, is another possible
 risk. If the procedure causes severe damage to the valve
 leaflets, immediate surgery is required. Less frequent
 complications are bleeding and hematoma (a local col
lection of clotted blood) at the puncture site, abnormal
 heart rhythms, reduced blood flow, heart attack, heart
 puncture, infection, and circulatory problems.