Definition
 A barbiturate-induced coma, or barb coma, is a
 temporary state of unconsciousness brought on by a
 controlled dose of a barbiturate drug, usually pento
barbital or thiopental.
 Purpose
 Barbiturate comas are used to protect the brain
 during major brain surgery, such as the removal of
 arteriovenous malformations or aneurysms. Coma may
 also be induced to control intracranial hypertension
 caused by brain injury.
 Precautions
 Barbiturate-induced comas are used when con
ventional therapy to reduce intracranial hypertension
 has failed. Barbiturate dosing is geared toward burst
 suppression–that is, reducing brain activity as mea
sured by electroencephalography. This reduction in
 brain activity has to be balanced against the potential
 side effects of barbiturates, which include allergic reac
tions and effects on the cardiovascular system.
 Description
 One of the greatest hazards associated with brain
 injury is intracranial hypertension. Brain injury may be
 caused by an accidental head injury or a medical condi
tion, such as stroke, tumor, or infection. When the
 brain is injured, fluids accumulate in the brain, causing
 it to swell. The skull does notallow forthe expansionof
 the brain; in effect, the brain becomes compressed. If the pressure does not abate, oxygenated blood
 may not reach all areas of the brain. Also, the brain
 tissue may be forced against hard, bony edges on the
 interior of the skull. In either case, the brain tissue may
 die, causing permanent brain damage or death.
 Barbiturates reduce the metabolic rate of brain
 tissue, as well as the cerebral blood flow. With these
 reductions, the blood vessels in the brain narrow,
 decreasing the amount of swelling in the brain. With
 the swelling relieved, the pressure decreases and some
 or all brain damage may be averted.
 Controversy exists, however, over the benefits of
 using barbiturates to control intracranial hyperten
sion. Some studies have shown that barbiturate
induced coma can reduce intracranial hypertension
 but does not necessarily prevent brain damage.
 Furthermore, the reduction in intracranial hyperten
sion may not be sustained.
 Preparation
 Inducing a barbiturate coma is usually kept in
 reserve for cases in which conventional treatments
 for controlling intracranial hypertension have
 failed. Before coma is induced, intracranial hyper
tension may be treated by hyperventilation; by
 facilitation of blood flow from the brain; by
 decompressive surgical procedures, such as draining
 excess fluids from under the skull or from the
 chambers within the brain (ventricles); or by drug
 therapy, including osmotherapy, diuretic agents, or
 steroids.
 Risks
 An estimated 25% of barbiturate-induced
 comas are accompanied by severe side effects. The
 side effects of barbiturates, especially the depres
sive effect on the cardiovascular system, can be too
 risky for some patients. Other side effects include
 impaired gastrointestinal motility and impaired
 immune response and infection. Since barbiturates
 depress activity in the brain, measurements of
 brain activity may be unreliable. Careful monitor
ing of the patient is required to ensure nutritional
 needs are being met and to guard against compli
cations, such as lung infection, fevers, or deep vein
 blood clots.
 Normal results
 In manypatients who do not respond to conven
tional therapy, barbiturate-induced coma can
 achieve the necessary control of intracranial
 hypertension.