 Definition
 Abarium enema, also known as a lower GI (gas
trointestinal) exam, is a test that uses x-ray examina
tion to view the large intestine. There are two types of
 this test: the single-contrast technique where barium
 sulfate is injected into the rectum in order to gain a
 profile view of the large intestine; and the double
contrast (or ‘‘air contrast’’) technique where air is
 inserted into the rectum.
 Purpose
 Abariumenemamaybeperformedforavariety of
 reasons, including to aid in the diagnosis of colon and
 rectal cancer (or colorectal cancer), and inflammatory
 disease. Detection of polyps (a benign growth in the
 tissue lining of the colon and rectum), diverticula (a
 pouch pushing out from the colon), and structural
 changes in the large intestine can also be established with
 this test. The double-contrast barium enema is the best
 methodfordetectingsmalltumors(suchaspolyps),early
 inflammatory disease, and bleeding caused by ulcers.
 The decision to perform a barium enema is based
 on a person’s history of altered bowel habits. These
 can include diarrhea, constipation, any lower abdom
inal pain they are currently exhibiting, blood, mucus,
 or pus in their stools. It is also recommended that this
 exam be used every five to 10 years to screen healthy
 people for colorectal cancer, the second most deadly
 type of tumor in the United States. Those who have
 a close relative with colorectal cancer or have had
 a precancerous polyp are considered to be at an
 increased risk for the disease and should be screened
 more frequently to look for abnormalities.
 Precautions
 While barium enema is an effective screening
 method in the detection of symptoms and may lead
 to a timely diagnosis of several diseases, it is not the  only method to do this. As of 1997, some studies have
 shown that the colonoscopy procedure performed by
 experienced gastroenterologists is a more accurate
 initial diagnostic tool for detecting early signs of color
ectal cancer. A colonoscopy is the most accurate way
 for the physician to examine the entire colon and
 rectum for polyps. If abnormalities are seen at this
 time the procedure is accompanied by a biopsy.
 Some physicians use sigmoidoscopy plus a barium
 enema instead of colonoscopy.
 Description
 To begin a barium enema, the patient will lie with
 their back down on atilting radiographic table in order
 to have x rays of the abdomen taken. After being
 assisted to a different position, a well-lubricated rectal
 tube is inserted through the anus. This tube allows the
 physician or assistant to slowly administer the barium
 into the intestine. While this filling process is closely
 monitored, it is important for the patient to keep the
 anus tightly contracted against the rectal tube to help
 maintain its position and prevent the barium from
 leaking. This step is emphasized to the patient due to
 the inaccuracy that may be caused if the barium leaks.
 Arectal balloon may also be inflated to help retain the
 barium. Thetablemaybetiltedor the patientmovedto
 a different position to aid in the filling process.
 Asthebariumfills the intestine, x rays of the abdo
men are taken to distinguish significant findings.There
 are manywaystoperformabariumenema.Onewayis
 that shortly after filling, the rectal tube is removed and
 the patient expels as much of the barium as possible.
 Uponcompletingthis, anadditional x ray is taken, and
 a double-contrast enema may follow. If this is done
 immediately, a thin film of barium will remain in the
 intestine, and air is then slowly injected to expand the
 bowel lumen. Sometimes no x rays will be taken until
 after the air is injected.
 Preparation
 In order to conduct the most accurate barium
 enema test, the patient must follow a prescribed diet
 and bowel preparation instructions prior to the test.
 This preparation commonly includes restricted intake
 of diary productsandaliquiddietfor24hourspriorto
 the test, in addition to drinking large amounts ofwater
 or clear liquids 12–24 hours before the test. Patients
 may also be given laxatives, and asked to give them
selves a cleansing enema.
 In addition to the prescribed diet and bowel pre
paration prior to the test, the patient can expect the
 following during a barium enema:
 They will be well draped with a gown as they are
 secured to a tilting x-ray table.
 Asthe barium or air is injected into the intestine, they
 mayexperiencecrampingpainsortheurgetodefecate.
 The patient will be instructed to take slow, deep
 breaths through the mouth to ease any discomfort.
 Aftercare
 Patients should follow several steps immediately
 after undergoing a barium enema, including:
 Drink plenty of fluids to help counteract the dehy
drating effects of bowel preparation and the test.
 Take time to rest. A barium enema and the bowel
 preparation taken before it can be exhausting.
 A cleansing enema may be given to eliminate any
 remaining barium. Lightly colored stools will be pre
valent for the next 24–72 hours following the test.
 Risks
 While abariumenemaisconsidered asafe screening
 test used on a routine basis, it can cause complications in
 certain people. The following indications should be kept
 in mind before a barium enema is performed:
 Those who have a rapid heart rate, severe ulcerative
 colitis, toxic megacolon, or a presumed perforation
 in the intestine should not undergo a barium enema.
 The test can be cautiously performed if the patient
 has a blocked intestine, ulcerative colitis, diverticuli
tis, or severe bloody diarrhea.
 Complications that may becausedbythetest include
 perforation of the colon, water intoxication, barium
 granulomas (inflamed nodules), and allergic reac
tion. These are all very rare.
 Normal results
 When the patient undergoes a single-contrast
 enema, their intestine is steadily filled with barium
 to differentiate the colon’s markings. A normal result
 displays uniform filling of the colon. As the barium is
 expelled, the intestinal walls collapse. A normal result
 on the x ray after defecation will show the intestinal
 lining as having a standard, feathery appearance.
 Accordingly, the double-contrast enema expands
 the intestine which is already lined with a thin layer of
 barium, but with air to display a detailed image of the
 mucosal pattern. Varying positions taken by the
 patient allow the barium to collect on the dependent
 walls of the intestine by way of gravity.
 Abnormal results
 Abariumenemaallows abnormalities to appear on
 anxraythatmayaidinthediagnosisofseveraldifferent
 conditions. Although most colon cancers occur in the
 rectosigmoid region, or upper part of the rectum and
 adjoining portion of the sigmoid colon, and are better
 detected with a different test called a proctosigmoido
scopy, an enemacanidentifyother early signs of cancer.
 Identification of polyps, diverticulosis, inflamma
tory disease, such as diverticulitis and ulcerative colitis
 is attainable through a barium x ray. Structural
 changes in the intestine, gastroenteritis, and some
 cases of acute appendicitis may also be apparent by
 viewing this x ray.