 Definition
 A Bartholin’s gland cyst is a swollen fluid-filled
 lump that develops from a blockage of one of the
 Bartholin’s glands, which are small glands located on
 each side of the opening to the vagina. Bartholin’s
 gland cysts and abscesses are commonly found in
 women of reproductive age, developing in approxi
mately 2% of all women.
 Description
 The Bartholin’s glands are located in the lips of the
 labia that cover the vaginal opening. The glands (nor
mally the size of a pea) provide moisture for the vulva
 area. ABartholin’sglandcystmayformintheglanditself
 or in the duct draining the gland. A cyst normally does
 not cause pain, grows slowly, and may go away with
out treatment. It usually ranges in size from 0.4-1.2 in.
 (1–3 cm), although some may grow much larger.
 If infected, a Bartholin’s gland cyst can form an
 abscess that will increase in size over several days and
 is very painful. In order to heal, a Bartholin’s gland
 cyst usually must be drained.
 Causes and symptoms
 A Bartholin’s gland cyst occurs if the duct
 becomes blocked for any reason, such as infection,
 injury, or chronic inflammation. Very rarely a cyst is
 caused by cancer, which usually occurs only in women
 over the age of 40. In many cases, the cause of a
 Bartholin’s gland cyst is unknown.
 Symptomsofanuninfected Bartholin’s gland cyst
 include a painless jump on one side of the vulva area
 (most common symptom) and redness or swelling in
 the vulva area.
 Symptoms of an abscessed Bartholin’s gland
 include:
 pain that occurs with walking, sitting, physical activ
ity, or sexual intercourse
 fever and chills
 increased swelling in the vulva area over a two- to
 four-day period
 drainage from the cyst, normally occurring four to
 five days after the swelling starts
 Abscesses may be caused by sexually transmitted
 bacteria, such as those causing chlamydial or gonococ
cal infections, while others are caused by bacteria normally occurring in the vagina. Over 60 types of
 bacteriahavebeenfoundinBartholin’sglandabscesses.
 Diagnosis
 A Bartholin’s gland cyst or abscess is diagnosed
 by a gynecological pelvic exam. If the cyst appears to
 be infected, a culture is often performed to identify the
 type of bacteria causing the abscess.
 Treatment
 Treatment for this condition depends on the size
 of thecyst, whetheritis painful, andwhetherthecystis
 infected.
 If the cyst is not infected, treatment options
 include:
 watchful waiting by the woman and her health care
 professional
 soaking of the genital area with warm towel
 compresses
 soaking of the genital area in a sitz bath
 use of non-prescription pain medication to relieve
 mild discomfort
 If the Bartholin’s gland is infected, there are several
 treatments available to treat the abscess, including:
 soaking of the genital area in a sitz bath
 treatment with antibiotics
 useofprescriptionornon-prescriptionpainmedication
 incision and drainage, i.e., cutting into the cyst and
 draining the fluid (not usually successful, as the cyst
 often reoccurs)  placement of a drain (Word catheter) in the cyst for
 two to four weeks so fluid can drain and prevent
 reoccurrence of the cyst
 marsupialization
 window operation
 use of a carbon dioxide laser to open the cyst and
 heat the cyst wall tissue so that the cyst cannot form a
 sac and reoccur
 incision and drainage, followed by treatment with
 silver nitrate to burn the cyst wall so the cyst cannot
 form a sac and reoccur
 removal of the entire Bartholin’s gland cyst, if the
 cyst has reoccurred several times after use of other
 treatment methods
 Duringsurgical treatment, the area will be numbed
 with a local anesthetic to reduce pain. General anesthe
sia may be used for treatment of an abscess, as the
 procedure can be painful.
 In a pregnant woman, surgical treatment of cysts
 that are asymptomatic should be delayed until after
 delivery to avoid the possibility of excessive bleeding.
 However, if the Bartholin’s gland is infected and must
 be drained, antibiotics and local anesthesia are gener
ally considered safe.
 If the cyst is caused by cancer, the gland must be
 excised, and the woman should be under the care of a
 gynecologist familiar with the treatment of this type of
 cancer.
 Alternative treatment
 If a Bartholin’s gland cyst has no or mild symp
toms, orhasopenedonitsowntodrain,awomanmay
 decide to use watchful waiting, warm sitz baths, and
 non-prescription pain medication. If symptoms
 become worseordonotimprove,ahealthcareprofes
sional should then be consulted.
 Infected Bartholin’s glands should be evaluated
 and treated by a health care professional.
 Prognosis
 ABartholin’s gland cyst should respond to treat
ment in a few days. If an abscess requires surgery,
 healing may take days to weeks, depending on the
 size of the abscess and the type of surgical procedure
 used. Most of the surgical procedures, except for inci
sion and drainage, should be effective in preventing
 recurring infections. 
 There are few ways to prevent the formation of
 Bartholin’s gland cysts or abscesses. However, as a
 Bartholin’s gland abscess may be caused by a sexually
 transmitted disease, the practice of safe sex is recom
mended.Usinggoodhygiene,i.e.,wipingfronttoback
 after a bowel movement, is also recommended to pre
vent bacteria from the bowels from contaminating the
 vaginal area.