Definition
 Battered child syndrome refers to injuries sus
tained by a child as a result of physical abuse, usually
 inflicted by an adult caregiver. Alternative terms
 include: shaken baby; shaken baby syndrome; child
 abuse; and non-accidental trauma (NAT).
 Description
 Internal injuries, cuts, burns, bruises and broken or
 fractured bones are all possible signs of battered child
 syndrome. Emotional damage to a child is also often
 the by-productofchild abuse,whichcanresult inserious
 behavioral problems such as substance abuse or the
 physical abuse of others. Approximately 14% of chil
dren in the United States are physically abused each
 year, and an estimated 2,000 of those children die as a
 result of the abuse.Between1994-1995,1.1million cases
 of child abusewererecordedintheUnitedStates;ofthat
 number, 55% of the victims were less than a year old.
 Causes and symptoms
 Battered child syndrome (BCS) is found at every
 level of society, although the incidence may be higher
 in low-income households where adult caregivers suf
fer greater stress and social difficulties, without having
 had the benefit of higher education. The child abuser
 most often injures a child in the heat of anger, and was
 often abused asachildhimself. The incessantcrying of
 an infant or child may trigger abuse. Symptoms may
 include a delayed visit to the emergency room with an
 injured child; an implausible explanation of the cause
 of a child’s injury; bruises that match the shape of a
 hand, fist or belt; cigarette burns; scald marks; bite
 marks; black eyes; unconsciousness; bruises around
 the neck; and a bulging fontanel in infants.
 Diagnosis
 Battered child syndrome is most often diagnosed
 byanemergencyroomphysicianorpediatrician,orby
 teachers or social workers. Physical examination will
 detect bruises, burns, swelling, retinal hemorrhages.
 X rays, and other imaging techniques, such as MRI
 or scans may confirm fractures or other internal inju
ries. The presence of injuries at different stages of
 healing (i.e. having occurred at different times) is
 nearly always indicative ofBCS. Establishing thediag
nosis is often hindered by the excessive cautiousness
 of caregivers or by actual concealment of the true origin of the childþs injuries, as a result of fear,
 shame and avoidance or denial mechanisms.
 Treatment
 Medical treatment for battered child syndrome
 will vary according to the type of injury incurred.
 Counseling and theimplementation of anintervention
 plan for the child’s parents or guardians is necessary.
 The child abuser may be incarcerated, and/or the
 abused child removed from the home to prevent
 further harm. Reporting child abuse to authorities is
 mandatory for doctors, teachers, and childcare work
ers in most states as a way to prevent continued abuse.
 Both physical and psychological therapy are often
 recommended as treatment for the abused child.
 Prognosis
 The prognosis for battered child syndrome will
 depend on the severity of injury, actions taken by the
 authorities to ensure the future safety of the injured
 child, and the willingness of parents or guardians to
 seek counseling for themselves as well as for the child.
 Prevention
 Recognizingthepotentialforchildabuseinasitua
tion, and the seeking or offering of intervention and
 counseling before battered child syndrome occurs is the
 best waytoprevent it. Signs that physical abuse may be
 forthcoming include parental alcohol or substance
 abuse;previousabuseofthechildorthechild’ssiblings;
 history of mental or emotional problems in parents;
 parents abused as children; absence of visible parental
 love or concern for the child; child’s hygiene neglected.