Definition
 Bed-wetting is the unintentional (involuntary) dis
charge of urine during the night. Although most chil
dren between the ages of three and five begin to stay
 dry at night, the age at which children are physically
 and emotionally ready to maintain complete bladder
 control varies. Enuresis is a technical term that refers
 to the continued, usually involuntary, passage of urine
 during the night or the day after the age at which
 control is expected.
 Description
 Most children wet the bed occasionally, and defi
nitions of the age and frequency at which bed-wetting
 becomes a medical problem vary somewhat. Many
 researchers consider bed-wetting normal until age 6.
 About 10% of 6-year-old children wet the bed about
 onceamonth.Moreboysthangirlshavethisproblem.
 The American Psychiatric Association, however,
 defines enuresis as repeated voiding of urine into the
 bedorclothesatagefiveorolder. Thewettingisusually
 involuntary but in some cases it is intentional. For a
 diagnosis of enuresis, wetting must occur twice a week
 for at least three months with no underlying physio
logical cause. Enuresis, both nighttime (nocturnal) and
 daytime (diurnal), at age five affects 7% of boys and
 3%ofgirls. By age 10, it affects 3% of boys and 2% of
 girls; only 1% of adolescents experience enuresis.
 Enuresis is divided into two classes. A child with
 primary enuresis has never established bladder con
trol. A child with secondary enuresis begins to wet
 after a prolonged dry period. Some children have
 both nocturnal and diurnal enuresis.
 Causes and symptoms
 The causes of bed-wetting are not entirely known.
 It tends to run in families. Most children with primary  enuresis have a close relative–a parent, aunt, or uncle
who also had the disorder. About 70% of children
 with two parents who wet the bed will also wet the
 bed. Twin studies have shown that both of a pair of
 identical twins experience enuresis more often than
 both of a pair of fraternal twins.
 Sometimes bed-wetting can be caused by aserious
 medical problem like diabetes, sickle-cell anemia, or
 epilepsy. Snoring and episodes of interrupted breath
ing during sleep (sleep apnea) occasionally contribute
 to bed-wetting problems. Enlarged adenoids cancause
 these conditions. Other physiological problems, such
 as urinary tract infection, severe constipation,orspinal
 cord injury, can cause bed-wetting.
 Children who wet the bed frequently may have a
 smaller than normal functional bladder capacity.
 Functional bladder capacity is the amount of urine a  person can hold in the bladder before feeling a strong
 urge to urinate. When functional capacity is small, the
 bladder will not hold all the urine produced during the
 night. Tests have shown that bladder size in these
 children is normal. Nevertheless, they experience fre
quent strong urges to urinate. Such children urinate
 often during the daytime and may wet several times at
 night. Although a small functional bladder capacity
 may be caused by a developmental delay, it may also
 be that the child’s habit of voiding frequently slows
 bladder development.
 Parents often report that their bed-wetting child is
 an extremely sound sleeper and difficult to wake.
 However, several research studies found that bed
wetting children have normal sleep patterns and that
 bed-wetting can occur in any stage of sleep.
 Recent medical research has found that many
 children who wet the bed may have a deficiency of
 an important hormone known as antidiuretic hor
mone(ADH).ADHhelpstoconcentrate urine during
 sleep hours, meaning that the urine contains less
 water and therefore takes up less space. This decreased
 volume of water usually prevents the child’s bladder
 from overfilling during the night, unless the child
 drank a lot just before going to bed. Testing of
 many bed-wetting children has shown that these
 children do not have the usual increase in ADH dur
ing sleep. Children who wet the bed, therefore, often
 produce more urine during the hours of sleep than
 their bladders can hold. If they do not wake up, the
 bladder releases the excess urine and the child wets
 the bed.
 Research demonstrates that in most cases bed
wetting does not indicate that the child has a physical
 or psychological problem. Children who wet the bed
 usually have normal-sized bladders and have sleep
 patterns that are no different from those of non-bed
wetting children. Sometimes emotional stress,suchas
 the birth of a sibling, a death in the family, or separa
tion from the family, may be associated with the onset
 of bed-wetting in a previously toilet-trained child.
 Daytime wetting, however, may indicate that the pro
blem has a physical cause.
 While most children have no long-term problems
 as a result of bed-wetting, some children may develop
 psychological problems. Low self-esteem may occur
 when these children, who already feel embarrassed,
 are further humiliated by angry or frustrated parents
 who punish them or who are overly aggressive about
 toilet training. The problem can by aggravated when
 playmates tease or when social activities such as sleep
away camp are avoided for fear of teasing.
 If a child continues to wet the bed after the age of
 six, parents may feel the need to seek evaluation and
 diagnosis by the family doctor or a children’s specia
list (pediatrician). Typically, before the doctor can
 make a diagnosis, a thorough medical history is
 obtained. Then the child receives a physical examina
tion, appropriate laboratory tests, including a urine
 test (urinalysis), and, if necessary, radiologic studies
 (such as x rays).
 If the child is healthy and no physical problem is
 found, which is the case 90% of the time, the doctor
 may not recommend treatment but rather may pro
vide the parents and the child with reassurance, infor
mation, and advice.
 Treatment
 Occasionally a doctor will determine that the pro
blem is serious enough to require treatment. Standard
 treatments for bed-wetting include bladder training
 exercises, motivational therapy, drug therapy, psy
chotherapy, and diet therapy.
 Bladder training exercises are based on the theory
 that those who wet the bed have small functional
 bladder capacity. Children are told to drink a large
 quantity of water and to try to prolong the periods
 between urinations. These exercises are designed to
 increase bladder capacity but are only successful in
 resolving bed-wetting in a small number of patients.
 In motivational therapy, parents attempt to
 encourage the child to combat bed-wetting, but the
 child must want to achieve success. Positive reinforce
ment, such as praise or rewards for staying dry, can
 help improve self-image and resolve the condition.
 Punishment for ‘‘wet’’ nights will hamper the child’s
 self-esteem and compound the problem.
 The following motivational techniques are com
monly used:
 Behavior modification. This method of therapy is
 aimed at helping children take responsibility for their
 nighttime bladder control by teaching new behaviors.
 For example, children are taught to use the bathroom
 before bedtime and to avoid drinking fluids after
 dinner. While behavior modification generally pro
duces good results, it is long-term treatment.
 Alarms. This form of therapy uses a sensor placed
 in the child’s pajamas or in a bed pad. This sensor
 triggers an alarm that wakes the child at the first sign
 of wetness. If the child is awakened, he orshe canthen
 gotothebathroomandfinishurinating.The intention is to condition a responsetoawakenwhenthebladder
 is full. Bed-wetting alarms require the motivation
 of both parents and children. They are considered
 the most effective form of treatment now available.
 A number of drugs are also used to treat bed
wetting. These medications are usually fast acting;
 children often respond to them within the first week
 of treatment. Among the drugs commonly used are a
 nasal spray of desmopressin acetate (DDAVP), a sub
stance similar to the hormone that helps regulate urine
 production; and imipramine hydrochloride, a drug
 that helps to increase bladder capacity. Studies show
 that imipramine is effective for as many as 50% of
 patients. However, children often wet the bed again
 after the drug is discontinued, and it has some side
 effects. Some bed-wetting with an underlying physical
 cause can be treated by surgical procedures. These
 causes include enlarged adenoids that cause sleep
 apnea, physical defects in the urinary system, or a
 spinal tumor.
 Psychotherapy is indicated whenthe child exhibits
 signs of severe emotional distress in response to events
 such as adeathinthefamily, the birth of anewchild, a
 change in schools, or divorce. Psychotherapy is also
 indicated if a child shows signs of persistently low self
esteem or depression.
 In rare cases, allergies or intolerances to certain
 foods–such as dairy products, citrus products, or cho
colate–cancausebed-wetting.Whenchildrenhavefood
 sensitivities, bed-wetting may be helped by discovering
 the substances that trigger the allergic response and
 eliminating these substances from the child’s diet.
 Alternative treatment
 Anumber of alternative treatments are available
 for bed-wetting.
 Massage
 According to practitioners of this technique, pres
sure applied to various points on the body may help
 alleviate the condition. Acupressure or massage, when
 donebyatrainedtherapist,mayalsobehelpfulinbed
wetting caused by a neurologic problem.
 Herbal and homeopathic remedies
 Some herbal remedies, such as horsetail (Equisetum
 arvense) have also been used to treat bed-wetting. A
 trained homeopathic practitioner, working at the consti
tutional level, will seek torebalancethechild’svitalforce,
 eliminating the imbalanced behavior of bed-wetting.
 Common homeopathic remedies used in this treatment
 include Causticum, Lycopodium, and Pulsatilla.
 Hypnosis
 Hypnosis is another approach that is being used
 successfully by practitioners trained in this therapy. It
 trains the child to awaken and go to the bathroom
 when his or her bladder feels full. Hypnosis is less
 expensive, less time-consuming, and less dangerous
 than most approaches; it has virtually no side effects.
 Recent medical studies show that hypnotherapy can
 work quickly–within four to six sessions.
 Prognosis
 Occasional bed-wetting is not a disease and it does
 not have a ‘‘cure.’’ If the child has no underlying
 physical or psychological problem that is causing the
 bed-wetting, in most cases he or she will outgrow the
 condition withouttreatment.About15%ofbedwetters
 become dry each year after age 6. If bed-wetting is
 frequent, accompanied by daytime wetting, or falls
 into the American Psychiatric Association’s diagnostic
 definition of enuresis, a doctor should be consulted. If
 treatment is indicated, it usually successfully resolves
 the problem. Marked improvement is seen in about
 75%of cases treated with wetness alarms.
 Prevention
 Although preventing a child from wetting the bed
 is not always possible, parents can take steps to help
 the child keepthebeddryatnight.Thesestepsinclude:
 Encouraging and praising the child for staying dry
 instead of punishing when the child wets.
 Remindingthechild tourinate before going tobed,if
 he or she feels the need.
 Limiting liquid intake at least two hours before
 bedtime.