 Definition
 Bedsores are also called decubitus ulcers, pressure
 ulcers, or pressure sores. These tender or inflamed
 patches develop when skin covering a weight-bearing
 part of thebodyissqueezed betweenboneandanother
 body part, or a bed, chair, splint, or other hard object.
 Description
 Each year, about one million people in the
 United States develop bedsores ranging from mild
 inflammation to deep wounds that involve muscle
 and bone. This often painful condition usually starts
 with shiny red skin that quickly blisters and deterio
rates into open sores that can harbor life-threatening
 infection.
 Bedsores are not cancerous or contagious. They
 are most likely to occur in people who must use wheel
chairs or who are confined to bed. In 1992, the federal
 Agency for Health Care Policy and Research reported
 that bedsores afflict:
 10%of hospital patients
 25%of nursing home residents
 60%of quadriplegics
 TheAgencyalso noted that 65%ofelderly people
 hospitalized with broken hips develop bedsores and
 that doctors fees for treatment of bedsores amounted
 to $2,900 per person.
 Bedsores are most apt to develop on the:
 ankles
 back of the head
 heels
 hips
 knees
 lower back
 shoulder blades
 spine
 People over the age of 60 are more likely than
 younger people to develop bedsores. Risk is also
 increased by:
 atherosclerosis (hardening of arteries)
 diabetes or other conditions that make skin more
 susceptible to infection
 diminished sensation or lack of feeling 
  heart problems
 incontinence (inability to control bladder or bowel
 movements)
 malnutrition
 obesity
 paralysis or immobility
 poor circulation
 prolonged bed rest, especially in unsanitary condi
tions or with wet or wrinkled sheets
 spinal cord injury
 Causes and symptoms
 Bedsores most often develop when constant pres
sure pinches tiny blood vessels that deliver oxygen and
 nutrients to the skin. When skin is deprived of oxygen
 andnutrients for aslittle as an hour, areas of tissue can
 die and bedsores can form.
 Slight rubbing or friction against the skin can
 cause minor pressure ulcers. They can also develop
 when a patient stretches or bends blood vessels by
 slipping into a different position in a bed or chair.
 Urine, feces, or other moisture increases the risk
 of skin infection, and people who are unable to move
 or recognize internal cues to shift position have a
 greater than average risk of developing bedsores.
 Other risk factors include:
 malnutrition
 anemia (lack of red blood cells)
 diuse atrophy (muscle loss or weakness from lack of
 use)
 infection 
  Diagnosis
 Bedsores usually follow six stages:
 redness of skin
 redness, swelling, and possible peeling of outer layer
 of skin
 dead skin, draining wound, and exposed layer of fat
 tissue death through skin and fat, to muscle
 inner fat and muscle death
 destruction of bone, bone, infection, fracture, and
 blood infection
 Treatment
 Prompt medical attention can prevent surface
 pressure sores from deepening into more serious infec
tions. For mild bedsores, treatment involves relieving
 pressure, keeping the wound clean and moist, and
 keeping the area around the ulcer clean and dry.
 Antiseptics, harsh soaps, and other skin cleansers can
 damage newtissue, so a saline solution should be used
 to cleanse the wound whenever a fresh non-stick dres
sing is applied.
 The patient’s doctor may prescribe infection
fighting antibiotics, special dressings or drying agents,
 or lotions or ointments to be applied to the wound in a
 thin film three or four times a day. Warm whirlpool
 treatments are sometimes recommended for sores on
 the arm, hand, foot, or leg.
 In a procedure called debriding, a scalpel may be
 used to remove dead tissue or other debris from the
 wound. Deep, ulcerated sores that don’t respond to
 other therapy mayrequireskin grafts or plastic surgery.
 Adoctor should be notified whenever a person:
 will be bedriddenorimmobilizedforanextendedtime
 is very weak or unable to move
 develops bedsores
 Immediate medical attention is required whenever:
 skin turns black or becomes inflamed, tender, swol
len, or warm to the touch.
 the patient develops a fever during treatment.
 the sore contains pus or has a foul-smelling discharge.
 With proper treatment, bedsores should begin to
 heal two to four weeks after treatment begins.
 Alternative treatment
 Zinc and vitamins A, C, E, and B complex help
 skin repair injuries and stay healthy, but large doses of
 vitamins or minerals should never be used without a
 doctor’s approval.
 A poultice made of equal parts of powdered slip
pery elm (Ulmus fulva), marsh mallow (Althaea officina
lis), and echinacea (Echinacea spp.) blended with a small
 amount of hot water can relieve minor inflammation.
 An infection-fighting rinse can be made by diluting two
 drops of essential tea tree oil (Melaleuca spp.) in eight
 ounces of water. An herbal tea made from the calendula
 (Calendula officinalis) can act as an antiseptic and
 woundhealing agent. Calendula cream can also be used.
 Contrasting hot and cold local applications can
 increase circulation to the area and help flush out
 waste products, speeding the healing process. The tem
peratures should be extreme (hot hot and ice cold), yet
 tolerable to the skin. Hot compresses should be applied
 for three minutes, followed by 30 seconds of cold com
press application, repeating the cycle three times. The
 cycle should always end with the cold compress.
 Prevention
 It is usually possible to prevent bedsores from
 developing or worsening. The patient should be
 inspected regularly; should bathe or shower every
 day, using warm water and mild soap; and should
 avoid cold or dry air. A bedridden patient should be
 repositioned at least once every two hours while
 awake. A person who uses a wheelchair should shift
 his weight every 10 or 15 minutes, or be helped to
 reposition himself at least once an hour. It is impor
tant to lift, rather than drag, a person being reposi
tioned. Bony parts of the body should not be
 massaged. Even slight friction can remove the top
 layer of skin and damage blood vessels beneath it.
 If the patient is bedridden, sensitive body parts
 can be protected by:
 sheepskin pads
 special cushions placed on top of a mattress
 a water-filled mattress
 a variable-pressure mattress whose sections can be
 individually inflated or deflated to redistribute
 pressure.
 Pillows or foam wedges can prevent a bedridden
 patient’s ankles from irritating each other, and pillows
 placed under the legs from mid-calf to ankle can raise
 the heels off the bed. Raising the head of the bed
 slightly and briefly can provide relief, but raising the
 head of the bed more than 30 degrees can cause the
 patient to slide, thereby causing damage to skin and
 tiny blood vessels. Apersonwhousesawheelchairshouldbeencour
aged to sit up as straight as possible. Pillows behind
 the head and between the legs can help prevent bed
sores, as can a special cushion placed on the chair seat.
 Donut-shaped cushions should not be used because
 they restrict blood flow and cause tissues to swell.
 Prognosis
 Bedsores can usually be cured, but about 60,000
 deaths a year are attributed to complications caused
 by bedsores. Bedsores can be slow to heal. Without
 proper treatment, they can lead to:
 gangrene (tissue death)
 osteomyelitis (infection of the bone beneath the
 bedsore)
 sepsis (tissue-destroying bacterial infection)
 other localized or systemic infections that slow the
 healing process, increase the cost of treatment,
 lengthen hospital or nursing home stays, or cause
 death 