 Definition
 Agroupofsymptomsthataffect avarietyof body
 systems, including musculoskeletal, gastrointestinal,
 and the central nervous system. These symptoms
 include ulceration of the mouth or the genital area,
 skin lesions, and inflammation of the uvea (an area
 around the pupil of the eye).
 Behcet’s syndrome is a chronic disease that
 involves multiple body systems. The disease is named
 for a Turkish dermatologist, Hulusi Behcet, who first
 reported a patient with recurrent mouth and genital
 ulcers along with uveitis in 1937. The disease occurs
 worldwide, but is most prevalent in Japan, the Middle
 East, and in the Mediterranean region. There is a
 wider prevalence among males than females in a
 ratio of two to one.
 Causes and symptoms
 The cause of Behcet’s syndrome is unknown.
 Symptoms include recurring ulcers in the mouth or
 the genital area, skin lesions, arthritis that affects
 mainly the knees and ankles, pain and irritation in
 the eyes, andfever. Themouthandgenitalulcerstend
 to occur in multiples and can be quite painful. In the
 mouth, these ulcers are generally found on the ton
gue, gums, and the inside of the lips or jaws. In the
 genital area, the ulcers usually occur on the penis and
 scrotumin malesandonthevulvaofwomen.Theeye
 inflammation can lead to blindness.
 Diagnosis
 Because Behcet’s syndrome is a multisystem dis
ease, it is difficult to diagnose. International criteria
 have been proposed toassist in classifying this disease.
 There is no one diagnostic feature of this disease, so
 diagnosis depends on grouping together enough
 symptoms in order to identify the disease. Symptoms
 of Behcet’s syndrome also occur in other diseases, so it
 is often necessary to rule out the other diseases before
 a definitive diagnosis can be reached.
 Treatment
 Some of the current drugs used to treat Behcet’s
 syndrome include corticosteroids, cyclosporine,
 azathioprine, chlorambucil, interferon alpha, thali
domide, levamisole and pulse cyclophosphamide.
 Prognosis
 The prognosis for Behcet’s syndrome is generally
 poor. There has been a documented case of Behcet’s
 lasting for 17 years. Although the disease is considered
 painful but not fatal, whenthe central nervous system is
 involved there is usually severe disability and death
 often occurs. The condition is usually chronic, although
 there can be remissions during the course of the disease.
 There is no predictable method to determine which patients will progress into the more serious symptoms,
 and which might move into remission.
 Prevention
 There is no known prevention for Behcet’s syndrome 