Definition
 Bejel, also known as endemic syphilis, is a
 chronic but curable disease,seenmostlyinchildren
 in arid regions. Unlike the better-known venereal
 syphilis, endemic syphilis is not a sexually trans
mitted disease.
 Description
 Bejel has many other names depending on the
 locality: siti, dichuchwa, njovera, belesh, and skerljevo
 are some of the names. It is most commonly found in
 the Middle East (Syria, Saudi Arabia, Iraq), Africa,
 central Asia, and Australia. Bejel is related to yaws
 and pinta, but has different symptoms.
 Causes and symptoms
 Treponema pallidum, the bacteria that causes
 bejel, is very closely related to the one that causes the
 sexually transmitted form of syphilis, but transmission
 is very different. In bejel, transmission is by direct
 contact, with broken skin or contaminated hands, or
 indirectly by sharing drinking vessels and eating uten
sils. T. pallidum is passed on mostly between children
 living in poverty in very unsanitary environments and
 with poor hygiene.
 The skin, bones, and mucous membranes are
 affected by bejel. Patches and ulcerated sores are com
mon in the mouth, throat, and nasal passages.
 Gummy lesions may form, even breaking through
 the palate. Other findings may include a region of
 swollen lymph nodes and deep bone pain in the legs.
 Eventually, bones may become deformed.
 Diagnosis
 T. pallidum can be detected by microscopic study
 of samples taken from the sores or lymph fluid.
 However, since antibody tests don’t distinguish
 between the types of syphilis, specific diagnosis of the
 type ofsyphilis dependsonthepatient’s history, symp
toms, and environment.
 Treatment
 Large doses of benzathine penicillin G given by
 injection into the muscle can cure this disease in any
 stage, although it may take longer and require
 additional doses in later stages. If penicillin cannot
 be given, the alternative is tetracycline. Since tetracy
cline can permanently discolor new teeth still forming,
 it is usually not prescribed for children unless no viable
 alternative is available.
 Prognosis
 Bejel is completely curable with antibiotic
 treatment. 
  Prevention
 The World Health Organization (WHO) has
 worked with many countries to prevent this and
 other diseases, and the number of cases has been
 reduced somewhat. Widespread use of penicillin has
 been responsible for reducing the number of existing
 cases, but the only way to eliminate bejel is by improv
ing living and sanitation conditions.