 Definition
 Benzodiazepines are medicines that help relieve
 nervousness, tension, and other symptoms by slowing
 the central nervous system.
 Purpose
 Benzodiazepines are a type of antianxiety drugs.
 While anxiety is a normal response to stressful situa
tions, some people have unusually high levels of anxi
ety that can interfere with everyday life. For these
 people, benzodiazepines can help bring their feelings
 under control. The medicine can also relieve troubling
 symptoms of anxiety, such as pounding heartbeat,
 breathing problems, irritability, nausea, and faintness.
 Physicians may sometimes prescribe these drugs for
 other conditions, such as muscle spasms, epilepsy and
 other seizure disorders, phobias, panic disorder,withdra
wal from alcohol, and sleeping problems. However,
 this medicine should not be used every day for sleep
 problems that last more than a few days. If used this
 way, the drug loses its effectiveness within a few weeks.
 Description
 The family of antianxiety drugs known as benzo
diazepines includes alprazolam (Xanax), chlordiazep
oxide (Librium), diazepam (Valium), and lorazepam
 (Ativan). These medicines take effect fairly quickly,
 starting to work within an hour after they are taken.
 Benzodiazepines are available only with a physician’s
 prescription and are available in tablet, capsule,
 liquid, or injectable forms.
 Recommended dosage
 The recommended dosage depends on the type of
 benzodiazepine, its strength, and the condition for
 which it is being taken. Doses may be different for
 different people. Check with the physician who pre
scribed the drug or the pharmacist who filled the pre
scription for the correct dosage.  Always take benzodiazepines exactly as directed.
 Never take larger or more frequent doses, and do not
 take the drug for longer than directed. If the medicine
 does not seem to be working, check with the physician
 who prescribed it. Do not increase the dose or stop
 taking the medicine unless the physician says to do so.
 Stopping the drug suddenly may cause withdrawal
 symptoms, especially if it has been taken in large
 doses or over a long period. People who are taking
 the medicine for seizure disorders may have seizures
 if they stop taking it suddenly. If it is necessary to stop
 taking the medicine, check with a physician for direc
tions on how to stop. The physician may recommend
 tapering down gradually to reduce the chance of with
drawal symptoms or other problems.
 Precautions
 Seeing a physician regularly while taking benzo
diazepines is important, especially during the first few
 monthsoftreatment.Thephysicianwillchecktomake
 sure the medicine is working as it should and will note
 unwanted side effects.
 People who take benzodiazepines to relieve ner
vousness, tension, or symptoms of panic disorder
 should check with their physicians every two to three
 months to make sure they still need to keep taking the
 medicine.
 Patients who are taking benzodiazepines for sleep
 problemsshouldcheckwiththeirphysiciansiftheyare
 not sleeping better within 7-10 days. Sleep problems
 that last longer than this may be a sign of another
 medical problem.
 People who take this medicine to help them sleep
 may have trouble sleeping when they stop taking the
 medicine. This effect should last only a few nights.
 Some people, especially older people, feel
 drowsy, dizzy, lightheaded, or less alert when using
 benzodiazepines. The drugs may also cause clumsi
ness or unsteadiness. When the medicine is taken at
 bedtime, these effects may even occur the next morn
ing. Anyone who takes these drugs should not drive,
 use machines or do anything else that might be
 dangerous until they have found out how the drugs
 affect them.
 Benzodiazepines mayalso causebehavior changes
 in some people, similar to those seen in people who act
 differently when they drink alcohol. More extreme
 changes, such as confusion, agitation, and hallucina
tions, also are possible. Anyone who starts having
 strange or unusual thoughts or behavior while taking
 this medicine should get in touch with his or her
 physician.
 Because benzodiazepines work on the central ner
voussystem,theymayaddtotheeffectsofalcoholand
 other drugs that slow down the central nervous  system, such as antihistamines, cold medicine, allergy
 medicine, sleep aids, medicine for seizures, tranquili
zers, some pain relievers, and muscle relaxants. They
 may also add to the effects of anesthetics, including
 those used for dental procedures. These effects may
 last several days after treatment with benzodiazepines
 ends. The combined effects of benzodiazepines and
 alcohol or other CNS depressants (drugs that slow the
 central nervous system) can be very dangerous, leading
 to unconsciousness or, rarely, even death. Anyone tak
ing benzodiazepines should not drink alcohol and
 should check with his or her physician before using
 any CNS depressants. Taking an overdose of benzodia
zepines can also cause unconsciousness and possibly
 death. Anyone who shows signs of an overdose or of the
 effects of combining benzodiazepines with alcohol or
 other drugs should get immediate emergency help.
 Warning signs include slurred speech or confusion,
 severe drowsiness, staggering, and profound weakness.
 Some benzodiazepines may change the results of
 certain medical tests. Before having medical tests, any
one taking this medicine should alert the health care
 professional in charge.
 Children are generally more sensitive than adults
 to the effects of benzodiazepines. This sensitivity may
 increase the chance of side effects.
 Older people are more sensitive than younger
 adults to the effects of this medicine and may be at
 greater risk for side effects. Older people who take
 these drugs to help them sleep may be drowsy during
 the day. Older people also increase their risk of falling
 and injuring themselves when they take these drugs.
 Special conditions
 People with certain medical conditions or who are
 taking certain other medicines can have problems if
 they take benzodiazepines. Before taking these drugs,
 be sure to let the physician know about any of these
 conditions:
 ALLERGIES. Anyone who has had unusual reac
tions to benzodiazepines or other mood-altering
 drugs in the past should let his or her physician know
 before taking the drugs again. The physician should
 also be told about any allergies to foods, dyes, preser
vatives, or other substances.
 PREGNANCY. Some benzodiazepines increase the
 likelihood of birth defects. Using these medicines dur
ing pregnancy may also cause the baby to become
 dependent on them andtohavewithdrawalsymptoms
 after birth. When taken late in pregnancy or around
 the time of labor and delivery, these drugs can cause
 other problems in the newborn baby, such as
 weakness, breathing problems, slow heartbeat, and
 body temperature problems.
 BREASTFEEDING. Benzodiazepines may pass into
 breast milk and cause problems in babies whose
 mothers taken the medicine. These problems include
 drowsiness, breathing problems, and slow heartbeat.
 Womenwhoarebreastfeeding their babies should not
 use this medicine without checking with their
 physicians.
 OTHER MEDICAL CONDITIONS. Before using ben
zodiazepines, people with any of these medical pro
blems should make sure their physicians are aware of
 their conditions:
 current or past drug or alcohol abuse
 depression
 severe mental illness
 epilepsy or other seizure disorders
 swallowing problems
 chronic lung disease such as emphysema, asthma,or
 chronic bronchitis
 kidney disease
 liver disease
 brain disease
 glaucoma
 hyperactivity
 myasthenia gravis
 porphyria
 sleep apnea
 USE OF CERTAIN MEDICINES. Taking benzodiaze
pines with certain other drugs may affect the way the
 drugs work or may increase the chance of side effects.
 Side effects
 The most common side effects are dizziness, light
headedness, drowsiness, clumsiness, unsteadiness, and
 slurred speech. These problems usually go away as the
 body adjusts to the drug and do not require medical
 treatment unless they persist or they interfere with
 normal activities.
 More serious side effects are not common, but
 may occur. If any of the following side effects occur,
 check with the physician who prescribed the medicine
 as soon as possible:
 behavior changes
 memory problems
 difficulty concentrating 
 confusion
 depression
 seizures (convulsions)
 hallucinations
 sleep problems
 increased nervousness, excitability, or irritability
 involuntary movements of the body, including
 the eyes
 low blood pressure
 unusual weakness or tiredness
 skin rash or itching
 unusual bleeding or bruising
 yellow skin or eyes
 sore throat
 sores in the mouth or throat
 fever and chills
 Patients who take benzodiazepines for a long time
 or at high doses may notice side effects for several
 weeks after they stop taking the drug. They should
 check with their physicians if these or other trouble
some symptoms occur:
 irritability
 nervousness
 sleep problems
 Other rare side effects may occur. Anyone who has
 unusual symptomsduringoraftertreatmentwithbenzo
diazepines should get in touch with his or her physician.
 Interactions
 Benzodiazepines may interact with a variety of
 other medicines. When this happens, the effects of
 one or both of the drugs may change or the risk
 of side effects may be greater. Anyone who takes
 benzodiazepines should let the physician know all
 other medicines he or she is taking. Among the drugs
 that may interact with benzodiazepines are:
 Central nervous system (CNS) depressants such as
 medicine for allergies, colds, hay fever, and asthma;
 sedatives; tranquilizers; prescription pain medicine;
 muscle relaxants; medicine for seizures; sleep aids;
 barbiturates; and anesthetics.
 Medicines other than those listed above may
 interact with benzodiazepines. Be sure to check with
 aphysician or pharmacist before combiningbenzodia
zepines with anyother prescription or nonprescription
 (over-the-counter) medicine. 