 Definition
 Beriberi is a disease caused by a deficiency of
 thiamine (vitamin B1) that affects many systems of
 the body, including the muscles, heart, nerves, and
 digestive system. Beriberi literally means ‘‘I can’t, I
 can’t’’ in Singhalese, which reflects the crippling effect
 it has on its victims. It is common in parts of southeast
 Asia, where white rice is the main food. In the United
 States, beriberi is primarily seen in people with chronic
 alcoholism.
 Description
 Beriberi puzzled medical experts for years as it
 ravaged people of all ages in Asia. Doctors thought it
 was caused by something in food. Not until the early
 1900s did scientists discover that rice bran, the outer
 covering that wasremovedtocreatethepolishedwhite
 rice preferred by Asians, actually contained something
 that prevented the disease. Thiamine was the first
 vitamin identified. In the 1920s, extracts of rice polish
ings were used to treat the disease.
 In adults, there are different forms of beriberi,
 classified according to the body systems most affected.
 Dry beriberi involves the nervous system; wet beriberi
 affects the heart and circulation. Both types usually
 occur in the same patient, with one set of symptoms
 predominating.
 A less common form of cardiovascular, or wet
 beriberi, is known as ‘‘shoshin.’’ This condition
 involves a rapid appearance of symptoms and acute
 heart failure. It is highly fatal and is known to cause
 sudden death in young migrant laborers in Asia whose
 diet consists of white rice.
 Cerebral beriberi, also known as Wernicke
Korsakoff syndrome, usually occurs in chronic alco
holics and affects the central nervous system (brain
 and spinal cord). It can be caused by a situation that
 aggravates a chronic thiamine deficiency, like an alco
holic binge or severe vomiting.
 Infantile beriberi is seen in breastfed infants of
 thiamine-deficient mothers, who live in developing
 nations.
 Although severe beriberi is uncommon in the
 United States, less severe thiamine deficiencies do
 occur. About 25% of all alcoholics admitted to a
 hospital in the United States show some evidence of
 thiamine deficiency.
  Causes and symptoms
 Thiamine is one of the B vitamins and plays an
 important role in energy metabolism and tissue build
ing. It combines with phosphate to form the coenzyme
 thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP), which is essential in
 reactions that produce energy from glucose or that
 convert glucose to fat for storage in the tissues.
 When there is not enough thiamine in the diet, these
 basic energy functions are disturbed, leading to pro
blems throughout the body.
 Special situations, such as an over-active meta
bolism, prolonged fever, pregnancy, and breastfeed
ing, can increase the body’s thiamine requirements
 and lead to symptoms of deficiency. Extended peri
ods of diarrhea or chronic liver disease can result in
 the body’s inability to maintain normal levels of
 many nutrients, including thiamine. Other persons
 at risk are patients with kidney failure on dialysis
 and those with severe digestive problems who are
 unabletoabsorbnutrients.Alcoholicsaresusceptible
 because they may substitute alcohol for food and
 their frequent intake of alcohol decreases the body’s
 ability to absorb thiamine.
 The following systems are most affected by
 beriberi:
 Gastrointestinal system. When the cells of the
 smooth muscles in the digestive system and glands
 do not get enough energy from glucose, they are
 unable to produce more glucose from the normal
 digestion of food. There is a loss of appetite, indiges
tion, severe constipation, and a lack of hydrochloric
 acid in the stomach.
 Nervous System. Glucose is essential for the central
 nervous system to function normally. Early defi
ciency symptoms are fatigue, irritability, and poor
 memory. If the deficiency continues, there is damage
 to the peripheral nerves that causes loss of sensation
 and muscle weakness, which is called peripheral neu
ropathy. The legs are most affected. The toes feel
 numb and the feet have a burning sensation; the leg
 muscles becomesoreandthecalfmusclescramp.The
 individual walks unsteadily and has difficulty getting
 upfromasquattingposition.Eventually,themuscles
 shrink (atrophy) and there is a loss of reflexes in the
 knees and feet; the feet may hang limp (footdrop).
 Cardiovascular system. There is a rapid heartbeat
 and sweating. Eventually the heart muscle weakens.
 Because the smooth muscle in the blood vessels is
 affected, the arteries and veins relax, causing swel
ling, known as edema, in the legs.
 Musculoskeletal system. There is widespread mus
cle pain caused by the lack of TPP in the muscle
 tissue.
 Infants who are breastfed by a thiamine
deficient mother usually develop symptoms of
 deficiency between the second and fourth month of
 life. They are pale, restless, unable to sleep, prone
 to diarrhea, and have muscle wasting and edema in
 their arms and legs. They have a characteristic,
 sometimes silent, cry and develop heart failure and
 nerve damage.
 Diagnosis
 A physical examination will reveal many of the
 early symptoms of beriberi, such as fatigue, irrita
tion, nausea, constipation, and poor memory, but
 the deficiency may be difficult to identify.
 Information about the individual’s diet and general
 health is also needed.
 There are many biochemical tests based on thia
mine metabolism or the functions of TPP that can
 detect a thiamine deficiency. Levels of thiamine can
 be measured in the blood and urine and will be
 reduced if there is a deficiency. The urine can be collected for 24 hours to measure the level of thia
mine excreted. Another reliable test measures the
 effect of TPP on red blood cell activity since all
 forms of beriberi affect the metabolism of red blood
 cells.
 Anelectroencephalogram(EEG),whichmeasures
 electrical activity in the brain, may be done to rule out
 other causes of neurologic changes. Observing
 improvements in the patient after giving thiamine
 supplements will also confirm the diagnosis.
 Treatment
 Treatmentwiththiaminereversesthe deficiency in
 the body and relieves most of the symptoms. Severe
 thiamine deficiency is treated with high doses of thia
mine given by injection into a muscle (intramuscular)
 or in a solution that goes into a vein (intravenously)
 for several days. Then smaller doses can be given
 either by injection or in pill form until the patient
 recovers. Usually there are other deficiencies in the
 Bvitamins that will also need treatment.
 Thecardiovascularsymptomsofwetberiberican
 respond to treatment within a few hours if they are
 not too severe. Heart failure may require additional
 treatment with diuretics that help eliminate excess
 fluid and with heart-strengthening drugs like
 digitalis.
 Recovery from peripheral neuropathy and other
 symptomsofdryberiberimaytakelongerandpatients
 frequently become discouraged. They should stay
 active; physical therapy will also help in recovery.
 Infantile beriberi is treated by giving thiamine to
 both the infant and the breast feeding mother until
 levels are normal.
 In Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome, thiamine should
 be given intravenously or by injection at first because the
 intestinal absorption of thiamine is probably impaired
 and the patient is very ill. Most of the symptoms will be
 relieved by treatment, though there may be residual
 memory loss.
 Excess thiamine is excreted by the body in the
 urine, and negative reactions to too much thiamine
 are rare. Thiamine is unstable in alkali solutions, so it
 should not be taken with antacids or barbiturates.
 Alternative treatment
 Alternative treatments for beriberi deal first with
 correcting the thiamine deficiency. As in conventional
 treatments, alternative treatments for beriberi stress
 a diet rich in foods that provide thiamine and other
 B vitamins, such as brown rice, whole grains, raw
 fruits and vegetables, legumes, seeds, nuts, and yogurt.
 Drinking more than one glass of liquid with a meal
 should be avoided, since this may wash out the vita
mins before they can be absorbed by the body.
 Thiamineshouldbetakendaily,withthedose depend
ing on the severity of the disease. Additional supple
ments of B vitamins, a multivitamin and mineral
 complex, and Vitamin C are also recommended.
 Other alternative therapies may help relieve the per
son’s symptoms after the thiamine deficiency is
 corrected.
 Prognosis
 Beriberi is fatal if not treated and the longer the
 deficiency exists, the sicker the person becomes. Most
 of the symptoms can be reversed and full recovery is
 possible when thiamine levels are returned to normal
 and maintained with a balanced diet and vitamin sup
plements as needed.
 Prevention
 A balanced diet containing all essential nutrients
 will prevent a thiamine deficiency and the develop
mentofberiberi. People who consume large quantities
 of junk food like soda, pretzels, chips, candy, and high
 carbohydrate foods made with unenriched flours may
 be deficient in thiamine and other vital nutrients. They
 may need to take vitamin supplements and should
 improve their diets.
 Dietary Requirements
 The body’s requirements for thiamine are tied
 to carbohydrate metabolism and expressed in terms
 of total intake of calories. The current recom
mended dietary allowances (RDA) are 0.5 mg for
 every 1000 calories, with a minimum daily intake
 of 1 mg even for those who eat fewer than 2,000
 calories in a day. The RDA for children and teen
agers is the same as for adults: 1.4 mg daily for
 males over age eleven, and 1.1 mg for females.
 During pregnancy, an increase to 1.5 mg daily is
 needed. Because of increased energy needs and the
 secretion of thiamine in breast milk, breast feeding
 mothers need 1.5 mg every day. In infants, 0.4 mg
 is advised.
 Food Sources
 The best food sources of thiamine are lean
 pork, beef, liver, brewer’s yeast, peas and beans,  whole or enriched grains, and breads. The more
 refined the food, as in white rice, white breads,
 and some cereals, the lower the thiamine. Many
 food products are enriched with thiamine, along
 with riboflavin, niacin, and iron, to prevent dietary
 deficiency.
 During the milling process, rice is polished and all
 the vitamins in the exterior coating of bran are lost.
 Boiling the rice before husking preserves the vitamins
 by distributing them throughout the kernel. Food
 enrichment programs have eliminated beriberi in
 Japan and the Phillipines.
 Like all B vitamins, thiamine is water soluble,
 which means it is easily dissolved in water. It will
 leach out during cooking in water and is destroyed
 by high heat and overcooking.