 Definition
 Beta blockers are medicines that affect the body’s
 response to certain nerve impulses. This, in turn,
 decreases the force and rate of the heart’s contrac
tions, which lowers blood pressure and reduces the
 heart’s demand for oxygen.
 Purpose
 The main use of beta blockers is to treat high
 blood pressure. Some also are used to relieve the type
 of chest pain called angina or to prevent heart attacks
 in people who already have had one heart attack.
 These drugs may also be prescribed for other condi
tions, such as migraine, tremors, and irregular heart
beat. In eye drop form, they are used to treat certain
 kinds of glaucoma.
 Description
 Beta blockers, also known as beta-adrenergic
 blockers, are available only with a physician’s
 prescription. They come in capsule, tablet, liquid, and
 injectable forms. Some common beta blockers are
 atenolol (Tenormin), metoprolol (Lopressor), nadolol
 (Corgard), propranolol (Inderal), and timolol
 (Blocadren). Timolol and certain other beta blockers
 are also sold in eye drop form for treating glaucoma. Eye drops that contain beta blockers include betaxolol
 (Betoptic), cartelol (Ocupress), and timolol (Timoptic).
 Recommended dosage
 The recommended dosage depends on the type,
 strength, and form of beta blocker and the condition
 for which it is prescribed. The physician who pre
scribed the drug or the pharmacist who filled the pre
scription can recommend the correct dosage.
 This medicine may take several weeks to notice
ably lower blood pressure. Taking it exactly as direc
ted is important.
 This medicine should not be stopped without
 checking with the physician who prescribed it. Some
 conditions may get worse when patients stop taking
 beta blockers abruptly. This may also increase the risk
 of heart attack in some people. Because of these possi
ble effects, it is important to keep enough medicine on
 handtogetthroughweekends,holidays,andvacations.
 Physicians may recommend that patients check
 their pulse before and after taking this medicine. If the
 pulse becomestooslow,circulationproblemsmayresult.
 Precautions
 Seeing a physician regularly while taking beta
 blockers is important. The physician will check to
 make sure the medicine is working as it should and
 will watch for unwanted side effects. People who have
 high blood pressure often feel perfectly fine. However,
 they should continue to see their physicians even when
 they feel well so that the physician can keep a close
 watch on their condition. Patients also need to keep
 taking their medicine even when they feel fine.
 Beta blockers will not cure high blood pressure,
 but will help control the condition. To avoid the ser
ious health problems that high blood pressure can
 cause, patients may have to take medicine for the rest
 of their lives. Furthermore, medicine alone may not be
 enough. Patients with high blood pressure may also
 need to avoid certain foods and keep their weight
 under control. The health care professional who is
 treating the condition can offer advice on what mea
sures may benecessary. Patients being treated for high
 blood pressure should not change their diets without
 consulting their physicians.
 Anyone taking beta blockers for high blood pres
sure should not take any other prescription or over-the
counter medicine without first checking with his or her
 physician. Some medicinesmayincreasebloodpressure.
 Anyone who is taking beta blockers should be
 sure to tell the health care professional in charge
 before having any surgical or dental procedures or
 receiving emergency treatment.
 Some beta blockers may change the results of
 certain medical tests. Before having medical tests, any
one taking this medicine should alert the health care
 professional in charge.
 Some people feel drowsy, dizzy, or lightheaded
 when taking beta blockers. Anyone who takes these
 drugs should not drive, use machines or do anything
 else that might be dangerous until they have found out
 how the drugs affect them.
 Beta blockers may increase sensitivity to cold,
 especially in older people or people who have poor
 circulation. Anyone who takes this medicine should dress warmly in cold weather and should be careful
 not to be exposed to the cold for too long.
 People who usually have chest pain when they
 exercise or exert themselves may not have the pain
 when they are taking beta blockers. This could lead
 them to be more active than they should be. Anyone
 taking this medicine should ask his or her physician
 how much exercise and activity is safe.
 Older people may be unusually sensitive to the
 effects of beta blockers. This may increase the chance
 of side effects.
 Physicians mayadvise peopletakingbetablockers
 to wear or carry medical identification indicating that
 they are taking this medicine.
 Special conditions
 People who have certain medical conditions or
 who are taking certain other medicines may have pro
blems if they take beta blockers. Before taking these
 drugs, the physician should know about any of these
 conditions:
 ALLERGIES. Anyone who has had unusual reac
tions to beta blockers in the past should let his or her
 physician know before taking the drugs again. The
 physician should also be told about any allergies to
 insect stings, medicines, foods, dyes, preservatives, or
 other substances. In peoplewith allergies to medicines,
 foods, or insect stings, beta blockers may make the
 allergic reactions more severe and harder to treat.
 Anyone who has an allergic reaction while taking
 beta blockers should get medical attention right
 away and should make sure the physician in charge
 knows that he or she is taking this medicine.
 Beta blockers may also cause serious reactions in
 people who take allergy shots. Anyone taking this
 medicine should be sure to alert the physician before
 having any allergy shots.
 DIABETES. Beta blockers may make blood sugar
 levels rise and may hide some symptoms of low
 blood sugar. Diabetic patients should discuss these
 possible problems with their physicians.
 PREGNANCY. Some studies of beta blockers show
 that these drugs cause problems in newborns whose
 mothers use them during pregnancy. Other studies do
 not show such effects. Women who are pregnant or
 who may become pregnant should check with their
 physicians about the use of beta blockers.
 BREASTFEEDING. Some beta blockers pass into
 breast milk and may cause breathing problems, slow
 heartbeat, and low blood pressure in nursing babies
 whose mothers take the drugs. Women who need to
 take beta blockers and who want to breastfeed their
 babies should check with their physicians.
 OTHER MEDICAL CONDITIONS. Beta blockers may
 increase breathing problems ormakeallergic reactions
 moresevereinpeoplewhohaveallergies,bronchitis,or
 emphysema. However, while breathing diseases were
 once thought to outrule use of beta blockers, new
 research in 2004 shows that this may have been a
 large misconception. A clinical trial showed that
 more than 98% of patients with chronic obstructive
 pulmonary disease safely used beta blockers. It is
 advised for patients with emphysema and other ser
ious pulmonary disease to check with a physician and
 discuss the new findings.
 Inpeoplewithanoveractive thyroid, stopping beta
 blockers suddenly may cause an increase in symptoms.
 Also, taking this medicine may hide a fast heartbeat,
 which is one of the symptoms of overactive thyroid.
 Effects of these drugs may be greater in people
 with kidney or liver disease because the medicine is
 cleared from the body more slowly.
 Beta blockers may also make the following med
ical conditions worse:
 Heart or blood vessel disease
 Unusually slow heartbeat (bradycardia)
 Myasthenia gravis (chronic disease causing muscle
 weakness and possibly paralysis)
 Psoriasis (itchy, scaly, red patches of skin)
 Depression (now, or in the past).
 Before using beta blockers, people with any of the
 medical problems listed in this section should make
 sure their physicians are aware of their conditions.
 USE OF CERTAIN MEDICINES. Taking beta blockers
 with certain other drugs may affect the way the drugs
 work or may increase the chance of side effects.
 Side effects
 The most common side effects are dizziness,drows
iness, lightheadedness, sleep problems, unusual tiredness
 or weakness, and decreased sexual ability. In men, this
 can occur as impotence or delayed ejaculation. These
 problems usually go away as the body adjusts to the
 drug and do not require medical treatment unless they
 persist or they interfere with normal activities. On the
 positive side, research in 2004 showed that use of beta
 blockers helps reduce risk for boen fractures.
 More serious side effects are possible. If any of the
 followingsideeffects occur,thephysicianwhoprescribed
 the medicine should be notified as soon as possible: 
 Breathing problems
 Resources
 Beta2
 Slow heartbeat
 Cold hands and feet
 Swollen ankles, feet, or lower legs
 Mental depression.
 Other side effects may occur. Anyone who has
 unusual symptoms after taking beta blockers should
 get in touch with his or her physician.
 Interactions
 Beta blockers mayinteract with anumberofother
 medicines. When this happens, the effects of one or
 both of the drugs maychangeortherisk ofside effects
 may be greater. Anyone who takes beta blockers
 should let the physician know all other medicines he
 or she is taking. Among the drugs that may interact
 with beta blockers are:
 Calcium channel blockers and other blood pressure
 drugs. Using these drugs with beta blockers may
 cause unwanted effects on the heart.
 Insulin and diabetes medicines taken by mouth. Beta
 blockers cause high blood sugar or hide the symp
toms of low blood sugar.
 Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAO) such as phe
nelzine (Nardil) or tranylcypromine (Parnate), used
 to treat conditions including depression and
 Parkinson’s disease. Taking beta blockers at the
 same time or within two weeks of taking MAO inhi
bitors may cause severe high blood pressure.
 Airway-opening drugs (bronchodilators) such as ami
nophylline (Somophyllin), dyphylline (Lufyllin)
 oxtriphylline
 (Choledyl),
 or
 (Somophyllin-T). When combined with beta block
ers, the effects of both the beta blockers and the
 airway-opening drugs may be lessened.
 Cocaine. High blood pressure, fast heartbeat, and
 heart problems are possible when cocaine and beta
 blockers are combined. Also, cocaine may interfere
 with the effects of beta blockers.
 Allergy shots or allergy skin tests. Beta blockers may
 increase the chance of serious reactions to these
 medicines.
 The list above may not include every drug that
 interacts with beta blockers. Checking with a physi
cian or pharmacist before combining beta blockers
 with any other prescription or nonprescription (over
the-counter) medicine is advised.