Definition
 Bile duct cancer, or cholangiocarcinoma, is a
 malignant tumor of the bile ducts within the liver
 (intrahepatic), or leading from the liver to the small  intestine (extrahepatic). It is a rare tumor with poor
 outcome for most patients.
 Description
 Bile is a substance manufactured by the liver that
 aids in the digestion of food. Bile ducts are channels
 that carry the bile from the liver to the small intestine.
 Like the tributaries of a river, the small bile ducts in
 the liver converge into two large bile ducts called the
 left and right hepatic ducts. These exit the liver and
 join to form the common hepatic duct. The gallblad
der, which concentrates and stores the bile, empties
 into the common hepatic duct to form the common
 bile duct. Finally, this large duct connects to the small
 intestine where the bile can help digest food.
 Collectively, this network of bile ducts is called the
 biliary tract.
 Bile duct cancer originates from the cells that line
 the inner surface of the bile ducts. A tumor may arise
 anywhere along the biliary tract, either within or out
side of the liver. Bile duct tumors are typically slow
growingtumorsthatspreadbylocalinvasionofneigh
boring structures and by way of lymphatic channels.
 Bile duct cancer is an uncommon malignancy. In
 the United States, approximately one case arises per
 100,000 people per year, but it is more common in
 Southeast Asia. It occurs in men only slightly more
 often than in women and it is most commonly diag
nosed in people in their 50s and 60s. In fact, about
 65%of patients with bile duct cancer are over age 65.
 Causes and symptoms
 A number of risk factors are associated with the
 development of bile duct cancer:
 Primary sclerosing cholangitis. This disease is char
acterized by extensive scarring of the biliary tract,
 sometimes associated with inflammatory bowel
 disease.
 Choledochalcysts.These areabnormaldilatationsof
 the biliary tract that usually form during fetal devel
opment. There is evidence that these cysts may rarely
 arise during adulthood.
 Hepatolithiasis. This is the condition of stone forma
tion withintheliver(notincludinggallbladderstones).
 Liver flukes. Parasitic infection with certain worms is
 thought to be at least partially responsible for the
 higher prevalence of bile duct cancer in Southeast
 Asia.
 Thorotrast. This is a chemical that was previously
 injected intravenously during certain types of x rays.
 It is not in use anymore. Exposure to Thorotrast has
 been implicated in the development of cancer of the
 liver as well as the bile ducts.
 Symptoms
 Jaundice is the first symptom in 90% of patients.
 This occurs when the bile duct tumor causes an
 obstruction in the normal flow of bile from the liver
 to the small intestine. Bilirubin, a component of bile,
 builds up within the liver and is absorbed into the
 bloodstream in excess amounts. This can be detected
 in a blood test, but it can also manifest as yellowish
 discoloring of the skin and eyes. The bilirubin in the
 bloodstream also makes the urine appear dark.
 Additionally, the patient may experience generalized
 itching due to the deposition of bile components in the
 skin. Normally, a portion of the bile is excreted in
 stool; bile actually gives stool its brown color. But
 when the biliary tract is obstructed by tumor, the
 stools may appear pale.
 Abdominal pain, fatigue, weight loss, and poor
 appetite are less common symptoms. Occasionally, if
 obstruction of the biliary tract causes the gallbladder
 to swell enormously yet without causing pain, the
 physician may be able to feel the gallbladder during a physical examination. Sometimes the biliary tract can
 become infected, but this is normally a rare conse
quence of invasive tests. Infection causes fever, chills,
 and pain in the right upper portion of the abdomen.
 Diagnosis
 Certain laboratory tests of the blood may aid in
 the diagnosis. The most important one is the test for
 elevated bilirubin levels in the bloodstream. Levels of
 alkaline phosphatase and CA 19-9 may also be
 elevated.
 When symptoms, physical signs, and blood tests
 point toward an abnormality of the biliary tract, the
 next step involves radiographic exams. Ultrasound,
 computed tomography (CT scan), and magnetic reso
nance imaging (MRI) are noninvasive and rapid. In
 recent years, MRI has become the favored imaging
 choice for initial diagnosis of cholangiocarcinoma
 when the exam is available and affordable or covered
 by insurance. These tests can often detect the actual
 tumor as well as dilatation of the obstructed biliary
 tract. If these tests indicate the presence of a tumor,
 cholangiography is required. This procedure involves
 injecting dye into the biliary tract to obtain anatomic
 images of the bile ducts and the tumor. The specialist
 that performs this test can also insert small tubes, or
 stents, into a partially obstructed portion of the bile
 duct to prevent further obstruction by growth of the
 tumor. This is vitally important since it may be the
 only intervention that is possible in certain patients.
 Cholangiography is an invasive test that carries a
 small risk ofinfection of the biliary tract. The objective
 of these radiological tests is to determine the size and
 location of the tumor, as well as the extent of spread to
 nearby structures.
 The treatment of bile duct tumors is usually not
 affected by the specific type of cancer cells that com
prise the tumor. For this reason, some physicians
 forego biopsy of the tumor.
 Treatment
 The treatment is with surgical resection (removal)
 ofthetumorandallinvolvedstructures.Unfortunately,
 sometimes the cancer has already spread too far when
 the diagnosis is made. Thus, in the treatment of bile
 duct cancer, the first question to answer is if the tumor
 may be safely resected by surgery with reasonable
 benefit to the patient. If the cancer involves
 certain blood vessels or has spread widely throughout
 the liver, resection may not be possible. Sometimes
 further invasive testing is required.
 Angiography candetermine ifthebloodvesselsare
 involved. Laparoscopy is a surgical procedure that
 allows the surgeon to directly assess the tumor and
 nearby lymph nodes without making a large incision
 in the abdomen. Only about 45% of bile duct cancers
 are ultimately resectable.
 If the tumor is resectable, and the patient is
 healthy enough to tolerate the operation, the specific
 type of surgery performed depends on the location of
 the tumor. For tumors within the liver or high up in
 the biliary tract, resection of part of the liver may be
 required. Tumors in the middle portion of the biliary
 tract can be removed alone. Tumors of the lower end
 of the biliary tract may require extensive resection of
 part of the pancreas, small intestine, and stomach to
 ensure complete resection.
 Unfortunately, sometimes the cancer appears
 resectable by all the radiological and invasive tests,
 but is found to be unresectable during surgery. In
 this scenario, a bypass operation can relieve the biliary
 tract obstruction, but does not remove the tumor
 itself. This does not produce a cure but it can offer a
 better quality of life for the patient.
 Prognosis
 Prognosis depends on the stage and resectability
 of the tumor. If the patient cannot undergo surgical
 resection, the survival rate is commonly less than one
 year. If the tumor is resected, the survival rate
 improves, with 20% of these patients surviving past
 five years.
 Clinical trials
 Studies of newtreatmentsinpatientsareknownas
 clinical trials. These trials seek to compare the stan
dard method of care with a new method, or the trials
 may be trying to establish whether one treatment is
 more beneficial for certain patients than others.
 Sometimes, a new treatment that is not being offered
 onawidescale maybeavailabletopatients participat
ing in clinical trials, but participating in the trials may
 involve some risk. To learn more about clinical trials,
 patients can call the National Cancer Institute (NCI)
 at 1-800-4-CANCER or visit the NCI web site for
 patients at <http://www.cancertrials.nci.nih.gov>.
 Prevention
 Other than the avoidance of infections caused by
 liver flukes, there are no known preventions for this
 cancer.