 Definition
 Biliary atresia is the failure of a fetus to develop an
 adequatepathwayforbiletodrainfromthelivertothe
 intestine.
 Description
 Biliary atresia is the most common lethal liver
 disease in children, occurring once every 10,000
15,000 live births. Half of all liver transplants are
 done for this reason.
 The normal anatomy of the bile system begins
 within the liver, where thousands of tiny bile ducts
 collect bile from liver cells. These ducts merge into
 larger and larger channels, like streams flowing into
 rivers, until they all pour into a single duct that empties
 into the duodenum (first part of the small intestine).
 Betweentheliverandtheduodenumthisducthasaside
 channel connected to the gall bladder. The gall bladder
 stores bile and concentrates it, removing much of its
 water content. Then, when a meal hits the stomach, the
 gall bladder contracts and empties its contents.
 Bile is a mixture of waste chemicals that the liver
 removes from the circulation and excretes through the
 biliary system into the intestine. On its way out, bile
 assists in the digestion of certain nutrients. If bile
 cannot get out because the channels are absent or
 blocked, it backs up into the liver and eventually into
 the rest of the body. The major pigment in bile is a
 chemical called bilirubin, which is yellow. Bilirubinis a
 breakdown product of hemoglobin (the red chemical
 in blood that carries oxygen). If the body accumulates
 an excess of bilirubin, it turns yellow (jaundiced). Bile
 also turns the stool brown. Without it, stools are the
 color of clay.
 Causes and symptoms
 It is possible that a viral infection is responsible
 for this disease, but evidence is not yet convincing. The
 cause remains unknown.
 The affected infant will appear normal at birth
 and during the newborn period. After two weeks the
 normal jaundice of the newborn will not disappear,
 and the stools will probably be clay-colored. At this
 point, the condition will come to the attention of a
 physician. If not, the child’s abdomen will begin to
 swell, and the infant will get progressively more ill.
 Nearly all untreated children will die of liver failure
 within two years.
 Diagnosis
 The persistence of jaundice beyond the second
 week in a newborn with clay-colored stools is a sure
 sign of obstruction to the flow of bile. An immediate
 evaluation that includes blood tests andimaging ofthe
 biliary system will confirm the diagnosis.
 Treatment
 Surgery is the only treatment. Somehow the sur
geon must create an adequate pathway for bile to
 escape the liver into the intestine. The altered anatomy
 of the biliary system is different in every case, calling
 upon the surgeon’s skill and experience to select and
 execute the most effective among several options. If
 the obstruction is only between the gall bladder and  the intestine, it is possible to attach a piece of intestine
 directly to the gall bladder. More likely, the upper
 biliary system will also be inadequate, and the surgeon
 will attach a piece of intestine directly to the liver–the
 Kasai procedure. In its wisdom, the body will discover
 that the tiny bile ducts in that part of the liver are
 discharging their bile directly into the intestine. Bile
 will begin to flow in that direction, and the channels
 will gradually enlarge. Survival rates for the Kasai
 procedure are commonly 50% at five years and 15%
 at 10 years. Persistent disease in the liver gradually
 destroys the organ.
 Prognosis
 Before liver transplants became available, even
 prompt and effective surgery did not cure the whole
 problem. Biliary drainage can usually be established,
 but the patients still have a defective biliary system
 that develops progressive disease and commonly leads
 to an early death. Transplantation now achieves up to
 90% one-year survival rates and promises to prevent
 the chronic disease that used to accompany earlier
 procedures.
 Prevention
 The specific cause of this birth defect is unknown,
 so all that women can do is to practice the many
 general preventive measures, even before they
 conceive. Biliary atresia is a congenital condition in which
 the pathway for bile to drain from the liver to the
 intestine is undeveloped. It is the most common lethal
 liver disease in children.