 Definition
 Binge eating disorder (BED) is characterized by a
 loss of control over eating behaviors. The binge eater
 consumesunnaturallylargeamountsoffoodinashort
 time period, but unlike a bulimic, does not regularly
 engage in any inappropriate weight-reducing beha
viors (for example, excessive exercise, vomiting, taking
 laxatives) following the binge episodes.
 Description
 BEDtypically strikes individuals sometime between
 adolescence and the early twenties. Because of the nat
ure of the disorder, most BED patients are overweight
 or obese. Studies of weight loss programs have shown
 that an average of 30% of individuals enrolling in these
 programs report binge eating behavior.
 Causes and symptoms
 Binge eating episodes may act as a psychological
 release for excessive emotional stress. Other circum
stances that may predispose an individual to BED
 include heredity and affective disorders, such as
 major depression. BED patients are also more likely
 to haveacomorbid,orco-existing, diagnosis of impul
sive behaviors (for example, compulsive buying), post
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), panic disorder, or
 personality disorders.
 Individuals who develop BED often come from
 families who put an unnatural emphasis on the  importance of food, for example, as a source of com
fort in times of emotional distress. As children, BED
 patients may have been taught to clean their plate
 regardless of their appetite, or that finishing a meal
 made them a ‘‘good’’ girl or boy. Cultural attitudes
 towards beauty and thinness may also be a factor in
 the BED equation.
 During binge episodes, BED patients experience a
 definite sense of lost control over their eating. They eat
 quickly and to the point of discomfort even if they
 aren’t hungry. They typically binge alone two or more
 times a week, and often feel depressed and guilty once
 the episode has concluded.
 Diagnosis
 Binge eating disorder is usually diagnosed and
 treated by a psychiatrist and/or a psychologist. In
 addition to an interview with the patient, personality
 and behavioral inventories, such as the Minnesota
 Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI), may be
 administered as part of the assessment process. One
 of several clinical inventories, or scales, may also be
 used to assess depressive symptoms, including the
 Hamilton Depression Scale (HAM-D) or Beck
 Depression Inventory (BDI). Thesetestsmaybeadmi
nistered in an outpatient or hospital setting.
 Treatment
 ManyBEDindividuals binge after long intervals
 ofexcessive dietaryrestraint; therapy helpsnormalize
 this pattern. The initial goal of BED treatment is
 to teach the patient to gain control over his eating
 behavior by focusing on eating regular meals and
 avoiding snacking. Cognitive-behavioral therapy,
 group therapy, or interpersonal psychotherapy may
 be employed to uncover the emotional motives, dis
torted thinking, and behavioral patterns behind the
 binge eating. Because the prevalence of depression in BED
 patients is high, psychopharmacological treatment
 with antidepressants may also be prescribed. Once
 the binge eating behavior is curbed and depressive
 symptoms are controlled, the physical symptoms
 of BED can be addressed. The overweight BED
 patient may be placed on a moderate exercise pro
gram and a nutritionist may be consulted to educate
 the patient on healthy food choices and strategies for
 weight loss.
 Prognosis
 Thepoordietaryhabitsandobesitythatare symp
tomatic of BED can lead to serious health problems,
 such as high blood pressure, heart attacks, and dia
betes, if left unchecked. BED is a chronic condition
 that requires ongoing medical and psychological man
agement. Tobringlong-termrelieftotheBEDpatient,
 it is critical to address the underlying psychological
 causes behind binge eating behaviors. It appears that
 up to 50% of BED patients will stop bingeing with
 cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT).