Definition
 Biofeedback, or applied psychophysiological
 feedback, is a patient-guided treatment that teaches
 an individual to control muscle tension, pain, body
 temperature, brain waves, and other bodily functions
 and processes through relaxation, visualization, and
 other cognitive control techniques. The name biofeedback refers to the biological signals that are
 fed back, or returned, to the patient in order for the
 patient to develop techniques of manipulating them.
 Purpose
 Biofeedback has been used to successfully treat a
 number of disorders and their symptoms, including
 temporomandibular joint disorder (TMJ), chronic
 pain, irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), Raynaud’s
 syndrome, epilepsy, attention-deficit hyperactivity
 disorder (ADHD), migraine headaches, anxiety,
 depression, traumatic brain injury, and sleep disorders.
 Illnesses that may be triggered at least in part by
 stress are also targeted by biofeedback therapy. Certain
 types of headaches, high blood pressure, bruxism (teeth
 grinding), post-traumatic stress disorder, eatingdisor
ders, substance abuse, and some anxiety disorders may
 be treated successfully by teaching patients the ability
 to relax and release both muscle and mental tension.
 Biofeedback is often just one part of a comprehensive
 treatment program for some of these disorders.
 NASA has used biofeedback techniques to treat
 astronauts who suffer from severe space sickness, dur
ing which the autonomic nervous system is disrupted.
 Scientists at the University of Tennessee have adapted
 these techniques to treat individuals suffering from
 severe nausea and vomiting that is also rooted in
 autonomic nervous system dysfunction.  Recent research also indicates that biofeedback may
 be a useful tool in helping patients with urinary incon
tinence regain bladder control. Individuals learning pel
vic-floor muscle strengthening exercises can gain better
 control over these muscles by usingbiofeedback. Sensors
 areplacedonthemusclestotrainthepatientwherethey
 are and when proper contractions are taking place.
 Description
 Origins
 In 1961, Neal Miller, an experimental psycholo
gist, suggested that autonomic nervous system
 responses (for instance, heart rate, blood pressure,
 gastrointestinal activity, regional blood flow) could
 be under voluntary control. As a result of his experi
ments, he showed that such autonomic processes were
 controllable. This work led to the creation of biofeed
back therapy. Willer’s work was expanded by other
 researchers. Thereafter, research performed in the
 1970s by UCLA researcher Dr. Barry Sterman estab
lished that both cats and monkeys could be trained to
 control their brain wave patterns. Sterman then used
 his research techniques on human patients with epi
lepsy, where he was able to reduce seizures by 60%
 with the use of biofeedback techniques. Throughout
 the 1970s, other researchers published reports of their
 use of biofeedback in the treatment of cardiac arrhyth
mias, headaches, Raynaud’s syndrome, and excess
 stomach acid, and as a tool for teaching deep relaxa
tion. Since the early work of Miller and Sterman,
 biofeedbackhasdevelopedintoafront-linebehavioral
 treatment for an even wider range of disorders and
 symptoms.
 During biofeedback, special sensors are placed on
 the body. These sensors measure the bodily function
 that is causing the patient problem symptoms, such as
 heart rate, blood pressure, muscle tension (EMG or
 electromyographic feedback), brain waves (EEC or elec
troencophalographic feedback), respiration, and body
 temperature (thermal feedback), and translates the
 information into a visual and/or audible readout, such
 as a paper tracing, a light display, or a series of beeps.
 While the patient views the instantaneous feed
back from the biofeedback monitors, he or she begins
 to recognize what thoughts, fears, and mental images
 influence his or her physical reactions. By monitor
ing this relationship between mind and body, the
 patient can then use these same thoughts and mental
 images as subtle cues, as these act as reminders to
 become deeply relaxed, instead of anxious. These
 reminders also work to manipulate heart beat, brain
 wave patterns, body temperature, and other bodily
 functions. This is achieved through relaxation exer
cises, mental imagery, and other cognitive therapy
 techniques.
 As the biofeedback response takes place, patients
 can actually see or hear the results of their efforts
 instantly through the sensor readout on the biofeed
back equipment. Once these techniques are learned
 and the patient is able to recognize the state of relaxa
tion or visualization necessary to alleviate symptoms,
 the biofeedback equipment itself is no longer needed.
 The patient then has a powerful, portable, and self
administered treatment tool to deal with problem
 symptoms.  Biofeedback that specializes in reading and alter
ing brain waves is sometimes called neurofeedback.
 The brain produces four distinct types of brain
 waves—delta, theta, alpha, and beta—that all operate
 at a different frequency. Delta, the slowest frequency
 wave, is the brain wave pattern associated with sleep.
 Beta waves, which occur in a normal, waking state,
 can range from 12-35 Hz. Problems begin to develop
 when beta wave averages fall in the low end (under
arousal) or the high end (overarousal) of that spec
trum. Underarousal might be present in conditions
 such as depression or attention-deficit disorder, and
 overarousal may be indicative of an anxiety disorder,
 obsessive compulsive disorder, or excessive stress.
 Beta wave neurofeedback focuses on normalizing
 that beta wave pattern to an optimum value ofaround
 14 Hz. A second type of neurofeedback, alpha-theta,
 focuses on developing the more relaxing alpha (8-13
 Hz) and theta waves (4-9 Hz) that are usually asso
ciated with deep, meditative states, and has been used
 with some success in substance abuse treatment.
 Through brain wave manipulation, neurofeedback
 can be useful in treating a variety of disorders that are
 suspected or proven to impact brain wave patterns,
 such as epilepsy, attention-deficit disorder, migraine
 headaches, anxiety, depression, traumatic brain injury,
 andsleep disorders. The equipmentusedforneurofeed
back usually uses a monitor as an output device. The
 monitor displays specific patterns that the patient
 attempts to change by producing the appropriate type
 of brain wave. Or, the monitor may reward the patient
 for producing the appropriatebrain wavebyproducing
 a positive reinforcer, or reward. For example, children
 may be rewarded with a series of successful moves in a
 displayed video game.
 Depending on the type of biofeedback, individuals
 mayneedupto30sessionswithatrainedprofessionalto
 learn the techniques required to control their symptoms
 on a long-term basis. Therapists usually recommend
 that their patients practice both biofeedback and relaxa
tion techniques on their own at home.
 Preparations
 Before initiating biofeedback treatment, the
 therapist and patient will have an initial consultation
 to record the patients medical history and treatment
 background and discuss goals for therapy.
 Before a neurofeedback session, an EEG is taken
 fromthepatient todetermine hisorherbaselinebrain
wave pattern.
 Biofeedback typically is performed in a quiet and
 relaxed atmosphere with comfortable seating for the
 536
 patient. Depending on the type and goals of biofeed
back being performed, one or more sensors will be
 attached to the patient’s body with conductive gel
 and/or adhesives. These may include:
 Electromyographic (EMG) sensors. EMG sensors
 measure electrical activity in the muscles, specifically
 muscle tension. In treating TMJ or bruxism, these
 sensors wouldbeplacedalongthemusclesofthejaw.
 Chronic pain might be treated by monitoring electri
cal energy in other muscle groups.
 Galvanic skin response (GSR) sensors. These are
 electrodes placed on the fingers that monitor per
spiration, or sweat gland, activity. These may also
 be called skin conductance level (SCL).
 Temperature sensors. Temperature, or thermal, sen
sors measurebodytemperatureandchangesinblood
 flow.
 Electroencephalography (EEG) sensors. These elec
trodes are applied to the scalp to measure the elec
trical activity of the brain, or brain waves.
 Heart rate sensors. A pulse monitor placed on the
 finger tip can monitor pulse rate.
 Respiratory sensors. Respiratory sensors monitor
 oxygen intake and carbon dioxide output.
 Precautions
 Individuals who useapacemakerorotherimplan
table electrical devices should inform their biofeed
back therapist before starting treatments, as certain
 types of biofeedback sensors have the potential to
 interfere with these devices.
 Biofeedback may not be suitable for some
 patients. Patients must be willing to take a very active
 role in the treatment process. And because biofeed
back focuses strictly on behavioral change, those
 patients who wish to gain insight into their symptoms
 by examining their past might be better served by
 psychodynamic therapy.
 Biofeedback may also be inappropriate for cogni
tively impaired individuals, such as those patients with
 organic brain disease or a traumatic brain injury,
 depending on their levels of functioning.
 Patients with specific pain symptoms of unknown
 origin should undergo a thorough medical examina
tion before starting biofeedback treatments to rule out
 any serious underlying disease. Once a diagnosis has
 beenmade,biofeedbackcanbeusedconcurrentlywith
 conventional treatment.  Biofeedback may only be one component of a
 comprehensive treatment plan. For illnesses and
 symptomsthatare manifested from anorganicdisease
 process, such as cancer or diabetes, biofeedback
 should be an adjunct to (complementary to), and not
 a replacement for, conventional medical treatment.
 Side effects
 There are no known side effects to properly admi
nistered biofeedback or neurofeedback sessions.
 Research and general acceptance
 Preliminary research published in late 1999 indi
cated that neurofeedbackmaybeapromisingnewtool
 in the treatment of schizophrenia. Researchers
 reported that schizophrenic patients had used neuro
feedback to simulate brain wave patterns that antipsy
chotic medications produce in the brain. Further
 research is needed to determine what impact this may
 have on treatment for schizophrenia.
 Theuseofbiofeedbacktechniquestotreatanarray
 of disorders has been extensively described in the med
ical literature. Controlled studies for some applications
 are limited, such as for the treatment of menopausal
 symptoms and premenstrual disorder (PMS). There is
 also some debate over the effectiveness of biofeedback
 in ADHDtreatment,and the lack of controlled studies
 onthatapplication. While manytherapists, counselors,
 and mental health professionals have reported great
 success with treating their ADHD patients with neuro
feedback techniques, some critics attribute this positive
 therapeutic impact to a placebo effect.
 There may also be some debate among mental
 health professionals as to whether biofeedback should
 be considered a first line treatment for some mental
 illnesses, and to what degree other treatments, such as
 medication, should be employed as an adjunct therapy.