 Definition
 Bipolar, or manic-depressive disorder, is a mood
 disorder that causes radical emotional changes and
 mood swings, from manic highs to depressive lows.
 The majority of bipolar individuals experience alter
nating episodes of mania and depression.
 Description
 In the United States alone, more than two million
 people are diagnosed with bipolar disorder. Research
 shows that as many as 10 million people might be
 affected by bipolar disorder, which is the sixth-leading
 cause of disability worldwide. The average age of
 onset of bipolar disorder is from adolescence through
 the early twenties. However, becauseofthecomplexity
 of the disorder, a correct diagnosis can be delayed for
 several years or more. In a survey of bipolar patients
 conducted by the National Depressive and Manic
 Depressive Association (MDMDA), one-half of
 respondents reported visiting three or more profes
sionals before receiving a correct diagnosis, and over
 one-third reported a wait of ten years or more before
 they were correctly diagnosed.
 Bipolar I disorder is characterized by manic epi
sodes, the ‘‘high’’ of the manic-depressive cycle. A
 person with bipolar disorder experiencing mania often
 has feelings of self-importance, elation, talkativeness,
 increased sociability, and a desire to embark on goal
oriented activities, coupled with the characteristics of
 irritability, impatience, impulsiveness, hyperactivity,  and a decreased need for sleep. Usually this manic
 period is followed by a period of depression, although
 a few bipolar I individuals may not experience a major
 depressive episode. Mixed states, where both manic or
 hypomanic symptoms and depressive symptoms occur
 at the same time, also occur frequently with bipolar I
 patients (for example, depression with the racing
 thoughts of mania). Also, dysphoric mania is common
 (mania characterized by anger and irritability).
 Bipolar II disorder is characterized by major
 depressive episodes alternating with episodes of hypo
mania, a milder form of mania. Bipolar depression
 may be difficult to distinguish from a unipolar major
 depressive episode. Patients with bipolar depression
 tend to have extremely low energy, retarded mental
 and physical processes, and more profound fatigue
 (for example, hypersomnia; a sleep disorder marked
 byaneedforexcessivesleep orsleepiness when awake)
 than unipolar depressives.
 Cyclothymia refers to the cycling of hypomanic
 episodes with depression that does not reach major
 depressive proportions. One-third of patients with
 cyclothymia will develop bipolar I or II disorder
 later in life.
 A phenomenon known as rapid cycling occurs in
 upto20%ofbipolar IandIIpatients. In rapidcycling,
 manicanddepressiveepisodesmustalternatefrequently;
 at least four times in 12 months; to meet the diagnostic
 definition. In some cases of ‘‘ultra-rapid cycling,’’ the
 patient may bounce between manic and depressive
 states several times within a 24-hour period. This con
dition is very hard to distinguish from mixed states.
 Bipolar NOS is a category for bipolar states that
 do not clearly fit into the bipolar I, II, or cyclothymia
 diagnoses.
 Causes and symptoms
 The source of bipolar disorder has not been
 clearly defined. Because two-thirds of bipolar patients
 have a family history of affective or emotional disor
ders, researchers have searched for a genetic link to the
 disorder. Several studies have uncovered a number of
 possible genetic connections to the predisposition for
 bipolar disorder. A 2003 study found that schizophre
nia and bipolar disorder could have similar genetic
 causes that arise from certain problems with genes
 associated with myelin development in the central
 nervous system. (Myelin is a white, fat-like substance
 that forms a sort of layer or sheath around nerve
 fibers.) Another possible biological cause under inves
tigation is the presence of an excessive calcium build
up in the cells of bipolar patients. Also, dopamine and
 other neurochemical transmitters appear to be impli
cated in bipolar disorder and these are under intense
 investigation.
 Over one-half of patients diagnosed with bipolar
 disorder have a history of substance abuse. There is a high rate of association between cocaine abuse and
 bipolar disorder. Some studies have shown up to 30%
 of abusersmeeting the criteria for bipolar disorder. The
 emotional and physical highs and lows of cocaine use
 correspond to the manic depression of the bipolar
 patient, making the disorder difficult to diagnosis.
 For some bipolar patients, manic and depressive
 episodes coincide with seasonal changes. Depressive
 episodes are typical during winter and fall, and
 manic episodes are more probable in the spring and
 summer months.
 Symptoms of bipolar depressive episodes include
 low energy levels, feelings of despair, difficulty con
centrating, extreme fatigue, and psychomotor retarda
tion (slowed mental and physical capabilities). Manic
 episodes are characterized by feelings of euphoria,
 lack of inhibitions, racing thoughts, diminished need
 for sleep, talkativeness, risk taking, and irritability. In
 extreme cases, mania can induce hallucinations and
 other psychotic symptoms such as grandiose illusions.
 Diagnosis
 Bipolar disorder usually is diagnosed and treated
 by a psychiatrist and/or a psychologist with medical
 assistance. In addition to an interview, several clinical
 inventories or scales maybeusedtoassessthepatient’s
 mental status and determine the presence of bipolar
 symptoms. These include the Millon Clinical
 Multiaxial Inventory III (MCMI-III), Minnesota
 Multiphasic Personality Inventory II (MMPI-2), the
 Internal State Scale (ISS), the Self-Report Manic
 Inventory (SRMI), and the Young Mania Rating
 Scale (YMRS). The tests are verbal and/or written
 and are administered in both hospital and outpatient
 settings.
 Psychologists and psychiatrists typically use the
 criteria listed in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
 of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV) as
 a guideline for diagnosis of bipolar disorder and
 other mental illnesses. DSM-IV describes a manic
 episode as an abnormally elevated or irritable mood
 lasting a periodofatleastoneweekthatisdistinguished
 by at least three of the mania symptoms: inflated self
esteem, decreased need for sleep, talkativeness, racing
 thoughts, distractibility, increase in goal-directed activ
ity, or excessive involvement in pleasurable activities
 that have a high potential for painful consequences. If
 the mood of the patient is irritable and not elevated,
 four of the symptoms are required.
 Although many clinicians find the criteria too
 rigid, a hypomanic diagnosis requires a duration
 of atleast four dayswithatleastthreeofthesymptoms
 indicated for manic episodes (four if mood is irritable
 and not elevated). DSM-IV notes that unlike manic
 episodes, hypomanic episodes do not cause a marked
 impairment in social or occupational functioning, do
 not require hospitalization, and do not have psychotic
 features. In addition, because hypomanic episodes are
 characterized by high energy and goal directed activ
ities and often result in a positive outcome, or are
 perceived in a positive manner by the patient, bipolar
 II disorder can go undiagnosed.
 Bipolar symptoms often present differently in
 children and adolescents. Manic episodes in these age
 groups are typically characterized by more psychotic
 features than in adults, which may lead to a misdiag
nosis of schizophrenia. Children and adolescents also
 tend toward irritability and aggressiveness instead of
 elation. Further, symptoms tend to be chronic, or
 ongoing, rather than acute, or episodic. Bipolar chil
dren are easily distracted, impulsive, and hyperactive,
 which can lead to a misdiagnosis of attention deficit
 hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Furthermore, their
 aggression often leads to violence, which may be mis
diagnosed as a conduct disorder.
 Substance abuse, thyroid disease, and use of
 prescription or over-the-counter medication can mask
 or mimic the presence of bipolar disorder. In cases of
 substance abuse, the patient must ordinarily undergo a
 period of detoxification and abstinence before a mood
 disorder is diagnosed and treatment begins.
 Treatment
 Treatment of bipolar disorder is usually achieved
 with medication. A combination of mood stabilizing
 agents with antidepressants, antipsychotics, and antic
onvulsants is used to regulate manic and depressive
 episodes.
 Mood stabilizing agents such as lithium, carba
mazepine, and valproate are prescribed to regulate the
 manic highs and lows of bipolar disorder:
 Lithium (Cibalith-S, Eskalith, Lithane, Lithobid,
 Lithonate, Lithotabs) is one of the oldest and most
 frequently prescribed drugs available for the treat
ment of bipolar mania and depression. Because the
 drug takes four to ten days to reach a therapeutic
 level in the bloodstream, it sometimes is prescribed in
 conjunction with neuroleptics and/or benzodiaze
pines to provide more immediate relief of a manic
 episode. Lithium also has been shown to be effective
 in regulating bipolar depression, but is not recom
mended for mixed mania. Lithium may not be an  effective long-term treatment option for rapid cyclers,
 who typically develop a tolerance for it, or may not
 respond to it. Possible side effects of the drug include
 weight gain, thirst, nausea, and hand tremors.
 Prolonged lithium use also may cause hyperthyroid
ism (a disease of the thryoid that is marked by heart
 palpitations, nervousness, the presence of goiter,
 sweating, and a wide array of other symptoms.)
 Carbamazepine (Tegretol, Atretol) is an anticonvul
sant drug usually prescribed in conjunction with
 other mood stabilizing agents. The drug often is
 used to treat bipolar patients who have not
 responded well to lithium therapy. Blurred vision
 and abnormal eye movement are two possible side
 effects of carbamazepine therapy.
 Valproate (divalproex sodium, or Depakote; valproic
 acid, or Depakene) is one of the few drugs available
 that has beenproveneffective intreating rapid cycling
 bipolar and mixed states patients. Valproate is pre
scribed alone or in combination with carbamazepine
 and/or lithium. Stomach cramps, indigestion, diar
rhea, hair loss, appetite loss, nausea, and unusual
 weight loss or gain are some of the common side
 effects of valproate. Note: valproate also is approved
 for the treatment of mania. A 2003 study found that
 the risk of death from suicide is about two and one
half times higher in people with bipolar disorder
 taking divalproex than those taking lithium.
 Treating the depression associated with bipolar
 disorder has proven more challenging. In early 2004,
 the first drug to treat bipolar administration was
 approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
 (FDA). It is called Symbyax, a combination of olanzi
pine and fluoxetine, the active ingredient in Prozac.
 Because antidepressants may stimulate manic
 episodes in some bipolar patients, their use typically
 is short-term. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
 (SSRIs) or, less often, monoamine oxidase inhibitors
 (MAOinhibitors) are prescribed for episodes of bipo
lar depression. Tricyclic antidepressants used to treat
 unipolar depression may trigger rapid cycling in bipo
lar patients and are, therefore, not a preferred treat
ment option for bipolar depression.
 SSRIs, such as fluoxetine (Prozac), sertraline
 (Zoloft), and paroxetine (Paxil), regulate depression
 by regulating levels of serotonin, a neurotransmitter.
 Anxiety, diarrhea, drowsiness, headache, sweating,
 nausea, sexual problems, and insomnia are all possi
ble side effects of SSRIs.
 MAOIssuch as tranylcypromine (Parnate) and phe
nelzine (Nardil) block the action of monoamine oxi
dase (MAO), an enzyme in the central nervous
 system. Patients taking MAOIs must cut foods high
 in tyramine (found in aged cheeses and meats) out of
 their diet to avoid hypotensive side effects.
 Bupropion (Wellbutrin) is a heterocyclic antidepres
sant. The exact neurochemical mechanism of the
 drug is not known, but it has been effective in reg
ulating bipolar depression in some patients. Side
 effects of bupropion include agitation, anxiety, con
fusion, tremor, dry mouth, fast orirregular heartbeat,
 headache, and insomnia.
 ECT, or electroconvulsive therapy, has a high success
 rate for treating both unipolar and bipolar depres
sion, and mania. However, because of the conveni
ence of drug treatment and the stigma sometimes
 attached to ECT therapy, ECT usually is employed
 after all pharmaceutical treatment options have been
 explored. ECT is given under anesthesia and patients
 are given a muscle relaxant medication to prevent
 convulsions. The treatment consists of a series of
 electrical pulses that move into the brain through
 electrodes on the patient’s head. Although the exact
 mechanisms behind the success of ECT therapy are
 not known, it is believed that this electrical current
 alters the electrochemical processes of the brain, con
sequently relieving depression. Headaches, muscle
 soreness, nausea, and confusion are possible side
 effects immediately following an ECT procedure.
 Temporary memory loss has also been reported in
 ECTpatients. In bipolar patients, ECT is often used
 in conjunction with drug therapy.
 Adjunct treatments are used in conjunction with
 a long-term pharmaceutical treatment plan:
 Long-acting benzodiazepines such as clonazepam
 (Klonapin) and alprazolam (Xanax) are used for
 rapid treatment of manic symptoms to calm and
 sedate patients until mania or hypomania have
 waned and mood stabilizing agents can take effect.
 Sedation is a common effect, and clumsiness, light
headedness, and slurred speech are other possible
 side effects of benzodiazepines.
 Neuroleptics suchas chlorpromazine (Thorazine)and
 haloperidol (Haldol) also are used to control mania
 while a mood stabilizer such as lithium or valproate
 takes effect. Because neuroleptic side effects can be
 severe (difficulty in speaking or swallowing, paralysis
 of the eyes, loss of balance control, muscle spasms,
 severe restlessness, stiffness of arms and legs, tremors
 in fingers and hands, twisting movements of body,
 and weakness of arms and legs), benzodiazepines are
 generally preferred over neuroleptics.
 Psychotherapy and counseling. Because bipolar dis
order is thought to be biological in nature, therapy is  recommended as a companion to, but not a substi
tute for, pharmaceutical treatment of the disease.
 Psychotherapy, such as cognitive-behavioral therapy,
 can be a useful tool in helping patients and their
 families adjust to the disorder, in encouraging com
pliance to a medication regimen, and in reducing the
 risk of suicide. Also, educative counseling is recom
mended for the patient and family. In fact, a 2003
 report revealed that peopleonmedicationforbipolar
 disorder had better results if they also participated in
 family-focused therapy.
 Clozapine (Clozaril) is an atypical antipsychotic
 medication used to control manic episodes in patients
 who have not responded to typical mood stabilizing
 agents. The drug has also been a useful prophylactic,
 or preventative treatment, in some bipolar patients.
 Common side effects of clozapine include tachycardia
 (rapid heart rate), hypotension, constipation, a
 nd
 weight gain. Agranulocytosis, a potentially serious but
 reversible condition in which the white blood cells that
 typically fight infection in the body are destroyed, is a
 possible side effect of clozapine. Patients treated with
 the drug should undergo weekly blood tests to monitor
 white blood cell counts.
 Risperidone (Risperdal) is an atypical antipsycho
tic medication that has been successful in controlling
 mania when low doses were administered. In early
 2004, the FDA approved its use for treating bipolar
 mania. The side effects of risperidone are mild com
pared to many other antipsychotics (constipation,
 coughing, diarrhea, dry mouth, headache, heartburn,
 increased length of sleep and dream activity, nausea,
 runny nose, sore throat, fatigue, and weight gain).
 Olanzapine (Zyprexa) is another atypical antipsy
chotic approved in 2003 for use in combination with
 lithium or valproate for treatment of acute manic
 episodes associated with bipolar disorder. Side effects
 include hypotension (low blood pressure) associated
 with dizziness, rapid heartbeat, and syncope, or low
 blood pressure to the point of fainting.
 Lamotrigine (Lamictal, or LTG), an anticonvul
sant medication, was found to alleviate manic symp
toms in a 1997 trial of 75 bipolar patients. The drug
 was used in conjunction with divalproex (divalproate)
 and/or lithium. Possible side effects of lamotrigine
 include skin rash, dizziness, drowsiness, headache,
 nausea, and vomiting.
 Alternative treatment
 General recommendations include maintaining a
 calm environment, avoiding overstimulation, getting
 plenty of rest, regular exercise, and proper diet.
 Chinese herbs may soften mood swings. Biofeedback
 is effective in helping some patients control symptoms
 such as irritability, poor self control, racing thoughts,
 andsleep problems. Adietlow invanadium(amineral
 found in meats andotherfoods) and high invitamin C
 may be helpful in reducing depression.
 Asurprisingstudyin2004foundthatararelyused
 combination of magnetic fields used in magnetic reso
nance imaging (MRI)scanningimprovedthemoodsof
 subjects with bipolar disorder. The discovery was
 made while scientists were using MRI to investigate
 effectiveness of certain medications. However, they
 found that a particular type of echo-planar magnetic
 field led to reports of mood improvement. Further
 studies may one day lead to a smaller, more conveni
ent use of magnetic treatment.
 Prognosis
 While most patients will show some positive
 response to treatment, response varies widely, from
 full recovery to a complete lack of response to all
 drug and/or ECT therapy. Drug therapies frequently
 need adjustment to achieve the maximum benefit for
 the patient. Bipolar disorder is a chronic recurrent
 illness in over 90% of those afflicted, and one that
 requires lifelong observation and treatment after diag
nosis. Patients with untreated or inadequately treated
 bipolar disorder have a suicide rate of 15-25% and a
 nine-year decrease in life expectancy. With proper
 treatment, the life expectancy of the bipolar patient
 will increase by nearly seven years and work produc
tivity increases by ten years.
 Prevention
 The ongoing medical management of bipolar dis
order is critical to preventing relapse, or recurrence, of
 manic episodes. Evenincarefully controlled treatment
 programs, bipolar patients may experience recurring
 episodes of the disorder. Patient education in the form
 of psychotherapy or self-help groups is crucial for
 training bipolar patients to recognize signs of mania
 and depression and to take an active part in their
 treatment program.