Definition
 Bird flu is an infectious disease caused by strains
 of the Type A influenza viruses that ordinarily only
 infect birds. Avian influenza A (H5N1) virus infected
 and caused the deaths of people.
 Description
 Bird flu, which is also known as avian influenza,
 was first identified in Italy more than 100 years ago.
 Avian viruses occur naturally in birds, and can infect
 birds including chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys,
 pheasants, quail, and guinea fowl. The avian influenza
 viruses generally do not infect humans.
 Avian viruses are carried around the world by
 migratory birds. Wild ducks are natural reservoirs of
 the infection, according to the World Health
 Organization (WHO). Those wild birds generally
 don’t become ill, but avian flu is extremely contagious
 and has caused some domesticated birds to become
 very ill and die. The casualties included chickens, tur
keys, and ducks.
 Virus suptypes
 Reaction to the infection varies among the species
 because flu viruses are constantly mutating into new
 strains or subgroups. Low-pathogenic viruses cause
 few or no symptoms in infected birds. However,
 some strains can mutate into highly pathogenic avian
 influenza (HPAI) strains that are extremely infectious
 and deadly to birds.
 The viruses are identified by a series of letters and
 numbers that refer to two proteins, hemagglutinin
 (HA) and neuraminidase (NA). There are 16 HA sub
types and nine NA subtypes of influenza A virus.
 Numerous combinations of the two proteins are
 possible, and each combination forms a new subtype.
 There are 15 different Influenza A subtypes that
 can infect birds, according to the United States
 Centers for Disease Control (CDC). In comparison,
 there are three known subtypes of human flu virus A:
 H1N1, H1N2, and H3N2. Avian viruses can infect
 pigs, but people are generally not affected. That chan
ged when there was an outbreak of H5N1 in Hong
 Kong in 1997.
 Deadly outbreaks
 ThehighlypathogenicH5N1viruswasfirstisolated
 in terns in South Africa in 1961, and then in HongKong
 in 1997. Hong Kong’s avian flu outbreak coincided
 with 18 cases of severe respiratory disease in people.
 Those diagnosed with bird flu had close contact with
 poultry. Six people died, according to WHO. There
 was ‘‘limited transmission’’ of the virus to health care
 workers, but they did not become seriously ill.
 Medical research showed that the avian virus had
 jumpedfrombirdstopeople. Within three days, Hong
 Kong’s poultry population of about 1.5 million birds
 was destroyed to prevent further infection. There was
 another H5N1 outbreak in Hong Kong in February
 of 2003. It affected two members of a family that had
 recently visited China. One person died, according to
 the WHO.  In the Netherlands in February of 2003, there was
 an outbreak of another highly pathogenic avian virus,
 H7N7.Twomonthslater,aveterinarian died from the
 virus. It also caused mild illness in 83 people.
 In Hong Kong, the avian virus subtype H9N2
 caused mild cases of flu in two children in 1999 and
 one child in the middle of December of 2003, accord
ing to WHO. While H9N2 was not highly pathogenic
 in birds, there was an outbreak of H5N1 in Korea in
 mid-December of 2003. The next month, there was an
 outbreak in Vietnam that was followed by outbreaks
 in other Asian countries.
 Human bird flu cases
 TheWorldHealthOrganizationtracks birdflu out
breaks and the charts the numbers of human cases that
 have been confirmed by a laboratory. There were 74
 cases and49deathsbetweenJanuaryof2004andMarch
 31, 2005. The flu caused two deaths in Cambodia. In
 Thailand, 12of 17peoplewithbirdfludied.InVietnam,
 the flu was fatal in 35 of 55 diagnosed cases. Deaths
 related to the H5N1 viruses have been caused by pneu
monia and pulmonary complications.
 Moreover, the Democratic People’s Republic of
 Korea (North Korea) officially reported the country’s
 first outbreak of avian influenza in poultry on March 27,
 2005. Outbreaks occurred at chicken farms, and there
 were no human cases at that time, according to WHO.
 In October 2005, an outbreak of bird flu was
 reported at a farm near the Mongolian capital of
 Hohhot in the People’s Republic of China. The H5N1
 strain of the virus was detected in a parrot located in
 Britain. The parrot contracted the disease while in quar
antine withbirdsoriginatingin Taiwan.InJanuary2006,
 the H5N1strainwasconfirmedasthecauseofdeathinat
 least two cases in Dogubeyazit,Turkey.Thiscase,aswell
 as others documented in countries across Europe, indi
cate the potential for the disease to spread worldwide.
 Preparing for a pandemic
 The World Health Organization and nations
 including the United States are troubled about the
 deadly consequences that could occur ifH5N1mutated
 into a newvirus subtype that could be transferred from
 one human to another. That subtype would develop if
 the avian virus acquired human influenza genes,
 according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture
 (USDA). A strain of bird flu spread by human-to
human contact could cause an influenza pandemic.
 Apandemic is a worldwide epidemic that is dan
gerous because people have little or no immunity to
 the new virus strain. Historically, pandemics occur
 three to four times during a century when new virus
 subtypes appear. After World War I, the great influ
enza pandemic of 1917-1918 caused from 40 to 50
 million deaths globally, according to WHO. The flu
 pandemic of 1968-1969 claimed 1 to 4 million lives.
 According to a 2004 WHO report, medical influ
enza experts agree that another flu pandemic is ‘‘inevi
table and possibly imminent.’’ In a December 8, 2004
 report, WHO warned that the ‘‘best case scenario’’
 projection for nextpandemicwasthatthenewflustrain
 would kill from 2 to 7 million people. Moreover, ‘‘tens
 of millions’’ of people would require medical attention.
 The appearance of H5N1 signals that the world is
 moving closer to a pandemic, WHO reported.
 The spread of H5N1 to humans increased the
 likelihood of a new strain emerging that could be
 transmitted by people. That could create a pandemic.
 Nations and the World Health Organization are
 working to prevent a pandemic or cause it to be less
 deadly. Their strategies include efforts to decrease the
 spread of flu strains in poultry and the development of
 vaccines to treat the virus in people.
 Causes and symptoms
 Avianfluis causedbyaninfluenzavirusthatbirds
 carry in their intestines. The virus spreads as infected
 birds excrete saliva, nasal secretions, and feces. Birds
 vulnerable to the flu become infected when they come
 into contact with the excretions or surfaces contami
nated by the infected matter.
 Birds that survive the H5N1 infection can
 excrete the virus for at least 10 days, according to a
 WHO report. The strain had proliferated through
 bird-to-bird contact to flocks on farms and poultry
 in live bird markets. The virus can also spread in
 surfaces including manure, bird feed, equipment,
 vehicles, egg flats, and crates, and the clothing and
 shoes of people who came into contact with the
 virus.
 A small amount of a highly pathogenic avian
 influenza virus could be deadly. One gram (0.035
 ounces) of contaminated manure could hold enough
 virus to infect 1 million birds, according to the USDA.
 From 1997 through the spring of 2005, the viruses
 primarily infected people in Asia who had contact
 with infected birds and surfaces.
 Bird flu symptoms in people
 In early 2005, information about symptoms of
 H5N1 in humans was based on the 1997 Hong Kong  outbreak. People experienced traditional flu symptoms
 such as a fever, cough, sore throat, and aching muscles.
 Other symptoms included eye infections (conjunctivi
tis), pneumonia, acute respiratory distress, viral pneu
monia, and other severe and life-threatening
 complications.
 Avian flu symptoms in birds
 The sudden death of a bird that had not appeared
 ill is one symptom of the highly pathogenic bird flu.
 According to the USDA, infected live birds may dis
play one or more of the following symptoms: lack
 of energy, appetite loss, nasal discharge, coughing,
 sneezing, a lack of coordination, and diarrhea. In
 addition, the bird may lay fewer eggs or produce eggs
 that are soft-shelled or misshapen. Furthermore, there
 may be swelling of the head, eyelids, comb, and wat
tles. Another symptom is purple discoloration on the
 combs, wattles, and legs.
 If there is an outbreak of the highly pathogenic
 flu in birds, they are destroyed to prevent the spread of
 the virus.
 Virus mixing vessels
 Influenza viruses undergo frequent changes and
 form new subtypes. In addition, influenza A viruses
 can trade genetic materials with the viruses of other
 species. Two different strains trade or merge material,
 a process known as an antigenic shift. That shift pro
duces a new subtype that is different from the two
 parent viruses. When the new subtype contains genes
 from the human virus, a pandemic resulted because
 there was no immunity to the virus and no vaccine to
 protect against it.
 The genetic shift occurs in a ‘‘mixing vessel’’ that
 was susceptible to both types of flu. In the past, the
 shift was thought to be related to people living close to
 pigs and domestic poultry. Pigs can be infected by
 avian viruses and mammalian viruses like the human
 strains, according to WHO. However, research into
 the H5N1 strain indicates that people can serve as the
 mixing vessels. As more people become infected with
 bird flu, the probability increases that humans would
 serve as the mixing vessel for a new subtype that could
 be transmitted from one person to another.
 Diagnosis
 Thesymptomsofavianfluandhumanfluarevery
 similar, so laboratory testing is needed to diagnose
 avian influenza. In addition to diagnosing the indivi
dual, testing in 2005 was performed to determine
 whether the infection was spreading from birds to
 people or from humans to humans.
 Diagnostic tests for human flu are rapid and reli
able, according to WHO. The international organiza
tion noted that laboratories within WHO’s global
 network have high-security facilities and experienced
 staff. Test methods include a viral culture that ana
lyses a blood sample and swabbings of the nose or
 throat. Other testing examines respiratory secretions.
 In the United States, the Centers for Disease
 Control is among the organizations preparing for a
 possible outbreak of bird flu in humans. In addition to
 specifics related to diagnosing bird flu, CDC refers
 healthcare workers to precautions to prevent the
 spread of flu and other respiratory infections in med
ical settings.
 Precautionary measures include directing people
 to observe cough etiquette. People with symptoms of
 respiratory infection should cover their mouths or use
 facial tissues when coughing or sneezing. After cough
ing or sneezing, the person should wash their hands
 with a non-antimicrobial soap and water, alcohol
based hand rub, or antiseptic handwash.
 Furthermore, people with flu-like symptoms may
 be given masks to wear while they are waiting to be
 examined by medical personnel. The healthcare work
ers should wear masks in some circumstances.
 Undoubtedly, they will wear masks when working
 with people with symptoms of bird flu.
 Treatment
 As of March of 2005, there was no vaccine to
 protect people from the H5N1 virus, according to the
 CDC. However, the U.S. agency and the World
 Health Organization had isolated seed strains of the
 virus in order to make a vaccine. Safety tests were
 scheduled to start in April of 2005 on a vaccine man
ufactured by Sanofi pasteur, a firm in Swiftwater,
 Pennsylvania, formerly known as Aventis Pasteur.
 On March 23, 2005, the National Institute of
 Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) announced
 that fast-track recruitment had started for volunteers
 to participate in an investigative study of the vaccine.
 During the Phase I trial, the trial vaccine will be tested
 on 450 healthy adults between the ages of 18 to 64,
 according to NIAID, which is part of the National
 Institutes of Health.
 Studies were to be conducted at University of
 California at Los Angeles, University of Maryland
 School of Medicine in Baltimore, and the University
 of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry,  Rochester, New York. If the vaccine is proven safe for
 adults, there were plans to test it in people in other age
 groups such as children and the elderly.
 Furthermore,researchwasunderwayonavaccine
 to fight H9N2, another avian flu virus subtype.
 Treatment with existing drugs
 Existing anti-viral medications may sometimes be
 effective against avian flu viruses, according to a
 March 18, 2005, report from CDC. In the United
 States, four drugs have been approved by the U.S.
 Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treat
ment and prevention of influenza A viruses.
 The medications amantadine (Symmetrel),
 rimantadine (Flumadine), seltamivir (Tamiflu), and
 zanamivir (Relenza) were clinically effective in the
 treatment of influenza A viruses in otherwise healthy
 adults.
 However, avian flu research indicated that the
 H5N1virus was resistant to amantadine and rimanta
dine, according to CCDC. The other two drugs would
 ‘‘probably work,’’ according to CDC. However, stu
dies were needed of the medication’s effectiveness.
 During the 2004 human flu season in the United
 States, the Associated Press reported that Relenza cost
 about $55 for the typical 10-day treatment. Tamiflu
 cost approximately $66 for the same course of treat
ment. Insurance frequently covered part of the pre
scription costs.
 For people diagnosed with bird flu, the World
 Health Organization recommends that patients take
 Tamiflu twice daily for five days. Treatment should
 begin as soon as possible. Patients may also receive
 medication to lower fevers and antibiotics to fight
 secondary infections.
 In the spring of 2005, there was no H5N1 vaccine.
 Countries including the United States were reportedly
 stockpiling Tamiflu in the event a pandemic erupted.
 At that time, WHO and CDC recommended the issu
ing of anti-viral medication as a preventive measure to
 people working in poultry production. Those people,
 along with health care workers, would have priority
 for the medications.
 Alternative treatment
 In March of 2005, people in South Korea began
 eating more kimchi to ward off avian flu infection,
 according to the reports from the British Broadcasting
 Company and other news organizations. The public
 turned to the spicy vegetable dish after scientists at
 Seoul National University announced that kimchi
 aided in the recovery of 11 out of 13 infected chickens.
 The scientists fed the birds an extract of kimchi, a dish
 made by fermenting cabbage with red peppers,
 radishes, and large amounts of garlic and ginger. A
 week later, all but two birds showed signs of recovery.
 The researchers acknowledged that their study
 was unscientific. At that time, they were not sure
 how or why kimchi was related to the recovery.
 However, the announcement led people to again
 regard kimchi as a health remedy. In 2003, interest in
 kimchi increased when people thought eating it helped
 prevent SARS (severe acute respiratory syndrome).
 No scientific confirmation was made between kimchi
 and SARS prevention.
 Prognosis
 Bird flu has been fatal to people, and there was
 concernin2005aboutthevirusmutatingintoastrain
 that could be transmitted by people. Health organi
zations and government agencies focused on pre
venting or reducing the risks of a pandemic caused
 by bird flu.
 In the United States, research was underway on
 vaccines to fight the flu. Other efforts include the
 USDA Safety’s guidelines for people working with
 poultry. Strategies included trade restrictions on poul
try and poultry products from Asia, according to the
 USDA.Importedlivebirdsandeggswerequarantined
 for 30 days. During that time, they weretested for bird
 flu and exotic Newcastle disease. The United States
 bans the import of poultry meat from Asia because
 meat processing plants were not approved by the
 USDA’s Food Safety and Inspection Service.
 Prevention
 In the spring of 2005, bird flu was primarily a risk
 for people in the United States who worked with
 poultry. Potentially vulnerable people included those
 workingwithpoultryonfarmsandavianhealthwork
ers like veterinarians. People working with birds in
 locations such as commercial poultry facilities, veter
inary offices, and live bird markets should wear pro
tective clothing. That equipment includes boots,
 coveralls, face masks, gloves, and headgear, according
 to the USDA. If necessary, they should receive anti
viral medications as a safeguard.
 Furthermore, poultry producers should imple
ment security measures to prevent the outbreak of a
 highly pathogenic virus. Those actions include keep
ing flocks away from wild or migratory birds and  providing clothing and disinfectant facilities for
 employees. Plastic crates should be used at live bird
 markets because they were easier to clean than wood
 crates. Cleaning and disinfecting areas were also
 important for preventing an outbreak.
 If necessary birds would be quarantined or
 destroyed.