 Definition
 Birthmarks, including angiomas and vascular
 malformations, are benign (noncancerous) skin
 growths composed of rapidly growing or poorly
 formed blood vessels or lymph vessels. Found at
 birth (congenital) or developing later in life (acquired)
 anywhere on the body, they range from faint spots to
 dark swellings covering wide areas.
 Description
 Skin angiomas, also called vascular (pertaining to
 vessel) nevi (marks), are composed of blood vessels
 (hemangiomas) or lymph vessels (lymphangiomas),
 that lie beneath the skin’s surface. Hemangiomas,
 composed of clusters of cells that line the capillaries,
 the body’ssmallest bloodvessels, arefound ontheface
 and neck (60%), trunk (25%), or the arms and legs
 (15%). Congenital hemangiomas, 90% of which
 appear at birth or within the first month of life, grow
 quickly, and disappear over time. They are found in 1
10% of full-term infants, and 25% of premature
 infants. About 65% are capillary hemangiomas
 (strawberry marks), 15%arecavernous(deep)heman
giomas, and the rest are mixtures. Hemangiomas are
 three times more common in girls. Usually, only one
 hemangioma is found, in 20% two are found, while
 fewer than 5% have three or more. Lymphangiomas
 are skin bumps caused by enlarged lymph vessels any
where on the body. Vascular malformations are poorly formed blood
 or lymph vessels that appear at birth or later in life.
 One type, the salmon patch (nevus simplex), a pink
 mark composed of dilated capillaries, is found on the
 back of the neck (also called a stork bite) in 40% of
 newborns, andontheforeheadandeyelids(also called
 an angel’s kiss) in 20%. Stork bites are found in 70%
 of white and 60% of black newborns.
 Found in fewer than 1% of newborns, port-wine
 stains (nevus flammeus), are vascular malformations
 composed of dilated capillaries in the upper and lower
 layers of the skin of the face, neck, arms, and legs.
 Often permanent, these flat pink to red marks develop
 into dark purple bumpy areas in later life; 85% appear
 on only one side of the body.
 Acquired hemangiomas include spider angiomas
 (nevus araneus), commonly known as spider veins,
 and cherry angiomas (senile angiomas or Campbell
 de Morgan spots). Found around the eyes, cheek
bones, arms, and legs, spider angiomas are red marks
 formed from dilated blood vessels. They occur during
 pregnancy in 70% of white women and 10% of black
 women, in alcoholics and liver disease patients, and in
 50% of children. Cherry angiomas, dilated capillaries
 found mainly on the trunk, appear in the 30s, and
 multiply with aging.
 Causes and symptoms
 There are no known causes for congenital skin
 angiomas; they may be related to an inherited weak
ness of vessel walls. Exposure toestrogencausesspider
 angiomas in pregnant women or those taking oral
 contraceptives. Spider angiomas tend to run in
 families, and may be associated with liver disease,
 sun exposure, and trauma. 
 Hemangiomas
 Hemangiomas first appear as single or multiple,
 white or pale pink marks, ranging from 2-20 cm (aver
age 2-5 cm)insize. Somearesymptomlesswhileothers
 cause pain or bleeding, or interfere with normal func
tioning whentheyarenumerous, enlarged,infected, or
 ulcerated. Vision is affected by large marks on the
 eyelids. Spider and cherry angiomas are unsightly
 but symptomless.
 Each type of hemangioma has a characteristic
 appearance:
 Capillary hemangiomas (strawberry marks). These
 round, raised marks are bright red and bumpy like
 a strawberry, and becomewhite orgraywhenfading.
 Cavernous hemangiomas. These slightly raised,
 dome-shaped, blueorpurpleswellingsare sometimes
 associated with lymphangiomas or involve the soft
 tissues, bone, or digestive tract.
 Spider angiomas. These are symptomless, reddish
 blue marks formed from blood-filled capillaries
 radiating around a central arteriole (small artery) in
 the shape of a spider web.
 Cherry angiomas. These harmless, dilated capillaries
 appear as tiny, bright red-to-violet colored bumps.
 Lymphangiomas. These dilated lymph vessels form
 light pink or yellow cysts (fluid- filled sacs) or swellings. 
 Vascular malformations
 These are faint, flat, pink stains that grow as the
 child grows into larger dark red or purple marks. Some
 are symptomless but others bleed if enlarged or injured.
 Disfiguring port-wine stains can cause emotional and
 social problems. About 5% of port-wine stains on
 the forehead and eyelids increase eye pressure due to
 involvement of the eye and surrounding nerves.
 Abnormalities of the spinal cord, soft tissues, or bone
 may be associated with severe port-wine stains.
 Each type has a characteristic appearance:
 Salmon patches. These symptomless, light red-to
pink marks usually fade with time.
 Port-wine stains. These flat, pink marks progress to
 raised, dark red-to-purple grape-like lumps distort
ing the facial features, arms, or legs.
 Diagnosis
 Patients are treated by pediatricians (doctors who
 specialize in the care of children), dermatologists (skin
 disease specialists), plastic surgeons (doctors who spe
cialize in correcting abnormalities of the appearance),
 and ophthalmologists (eye disease specialists).
 Angiomasandvascular malformations are not dif
ficult to diagnose. The doctor takes a complete medical
 history and performs a physical examination including
 inspection and palpation of the marks. The skin is
 examined for discoloration, scarring, bleeding, infec
tion, or ulceration. The type, location, size, number,
 andseverity of the marksare recorded. The doctor may
 emptythemarkofbloodbygentlepressure.Biopsiesor
 specialized x rays or scans of the abnormal vessels and
 their surrounding areas may be performed. Patients
 with port-wine stains near the eye may require skull x
 rays, computed tomography scans, and vision and
 central nervous system tests. Most insurance plans
 pay for diagnosis and treatment of these conditions.
 Treatment
 Treatmentchoices for skin angiomasandvascular
 malformations depend on their type, location, and
 severity, and whether they cause symptoms, pain, or
 disfigurement.
 Watchful waiting
 No treatment is given, but the mark is regularly
 examined. This continues until the mark disappears,
 or requires treatment. This approach is particularly
 appropriate for the treatment of hemangiomas,
 which often do not require treatment, since they even
tually shrink by themselves.
 Drugs
 CORTICOSTEROIDS. Daily doses of the anti
inflammatory drugs prednisone or prednisolone are
 given for up to 2 months with gradual reduction of
 the dose. The marks begintosubside within 7-10 days,
 but may take up to 2 months to fully disappear. If no
 response is seen in 2 weeks, the drug is discontinued.
 Treatmentmayberepeated.Sideeffectsincludegrowth
 retardation, increased blood pressure and blood sugar,
 cataracts, glandular disorders, and infection. The cor
ticosteroids triamcinolone acetate and betamethasone
 sodium phosphate or acetate are injected directly into
 the marks with a response usually achieved within a
 week; additional injections are given in 4-6 weeks. Side
 effects include tissue damage at the injection site.
 INTERFERON ALPHA-2A. This drug reduces cell
 growth, and is used for vascular marks that affect
 vision, and that are unresponsive to corticosteroids.
 Given in daily injections under the skin, a response
 rate of 50% is achieved after about 7 months. Side
 effects include fever, chills, muscle and joint pain,
 vision disorders, low white and red blood cell counts,
 fatigue, elevated liver enzymes, nausea, blood clotting
 problems, and nerve damage.
 ANTIBIOTICS. Oral or topical (applied to the skin)
 antibiotics are prescribed for infected marks.
 Surgery
 LASER SURGERY. Lasers create intense heat that
 destroys abnormal blood vessels beneath the skin,
 without damaging normal skin. Two types of lasers
 are used: the flashlamp-pulsed dye laser (FPDL) and
 the neodymium:YAG (Nd:YAG) laser. The FPDL,
 used mainly for strawberry marks and port-wine
 stains, penetrates to a depth of 1.8 mm and causes
 little scarring, while the Nd:YAG laser penetrates to
 a depth of 6 mm, and is used to treat deep hemangio
mas. Laser surgery is not usually painful, but can be
 uncomfortable. Anesthetic cream is used for FPDL
 treatment. Treatment with the Nd:YAG laser requires
 local or general anesthesia. Children are usually
 sedated or anesthetized. Healing occurs within 2
 weeks. Side effects include bruising, skin discolora
tion, swelling, crusting, and minor bleeding.
 SURGICAL EXCISION. Under local or general
 anesthesia, the skin is cut with a surgical instrument,
 andvascularmarksortheirscarsareremoved.Thecut
 is repaired with stitches or skin clips. 
  CRYOSURGERY. Vascularmarksarefrozenwithan
 extremely cold substance sprayed onto the skin.
 Wounds heal with minimal scarring.
 ELECTRODESICCATION. Affected
 vessels
 destroyed with the current from an electric needle.
 Other treatments
 These include:
 are
 Sclerotherapy. Injection of a special solution causes
 blood clotting and shrinkage with little scarring. Side
 effects include stinging, swelling, bruising, scarring,
 muscle cramping, and allergic reactions. This treat
ment is used most commonly for spider angiomas.
 Embolization. Material injected into the vessel
 blocks blood flow which helps control blood loss
 during or reduces the size of inoperable growths. A
 serious side effect, stroke, can occur if a major blood
 vessel becomes blocked.
 Make-up.Special brands are designedto cover birth
marks (Covermark or Dermablend).
 Cleaning and compression. Bleeding marks are
 cleaned with soap and water or hydrogen peroxide,
 andcompressedwithasterilebandagefor5-10minutes.
 Alternative treatment
 Alternative treatments for strengthening weak
 blood vessels include eating high-fiber foods and
 those containing bioflavonoids, including citrus fruit,
 blueberries, and cherries, supplementing the diet with
 vitamin C, and taking the herbs, ginkgo (Ginkgo
 biloba) and bilberry (Vaccinium myrtillus.)
 Prognosis
 The various types of birthmarks have different
 prognoses:
 Capillary hemangiomas. Fewer than 10% require
 treatment. Without treatment, 50% disappear by
 age 5, 70% by age 7, and 90% by age 9. No skin
 changes are found in half while others have some
 discoloration, scarring, or wrinkling. From 30-90%
 respond to oral corticosteroids, and 45% respond to
 injected corticosteroids; 50% respond to interferon
 Alpha-2a. About 60% improve after laser surgery.
 Cavernous hemangiomas. Some do not disappear
 and someare complicated by ulceration or infection.
 About 75% respond to Nd:YAG laser surgery but
 have scarring. Severe marks respond to oral corticos
teroids, but some require excision.
 Spider angiomas.Thesefadefollowingchildbirth and
 in children, but may recur. About 90% respond to
 sclerotherapy, electrodesiccation, or laser therapy.
 Cherry angiomas. These are easily removed by
 electrodesiccation.
 Lymphangiomas. These require surgery.
 Salmon patches. Eyelid marks disappear by 6-12
 months of age, and forehead marks fade by age 6;
 however, 50% of stork bites on the neck persist into
 adulthood.
 Port-wine stains. Some flat birthmarks are easily
 covered with make-up. Treatment during infancy
 or childhood improves results. About 95% of the
 stains respondtoFPDLsurgerywithminimalscarring;
 25%will completely and 70% will partially disappear.
 For unknown reasons, 5% show no improvement.
 Prevention
 Congenital hemangiomas or vascular malform
ations cannot be prevented, but spider angiomas
 may be prevented by exercise, weight control, and a
 high-fiber diet, as well as avoidance of sun exposure,
 alcohol drinking, or wearing tight hosiery.