Definition
 Birth defects are physical abnormalities that are
 present at birth; they also are called congenital
 abnormalities. More than 3,000 have been identified.
 Description
 Birth defects are found in 2-3% of all newborn
 infants. This rate doubles in the first year, and reaches
 10% by age five, as more defects become evident and
 can be diagnosed. Almost 20% of deaths in newborns
 are caused by birth defects.
 Abnormalities can occur in any major organ or
 part of the body. Major defects are structural abnor
malities that affect the way a person looks and require
 medical and/or surgical treatment. Minor defects are
 abnormalities that do not cause serious health or social
 problems. When multiple birth defects occur together
 and have a similar cause, they are called syndromes. If
 two or moredefects tend to appear together but do not
 share the same cause, they are called associations.
 Causes and symptoms
 The specific cause of many congenital abnormal
ities is unknown, but several factors associated with
 pregnancy and delivery can increase the risk of birth
 defects.
 Teratogens
 Any substance that can cause abnormal develop
ment of the egg in the mother’s womb is called a
 teratogen. In the first two months after conception,
 the developing organism is called an embryo; develop
mental stages from two months to birth are called
 fetal. Growth is rapid, and each body organ has a
 critical period in which it is especially sensitive to out
side influences. About 7% of all congenital defects are
 caused by exposure to teratogens.
 DRUGS. Onlyafewdrugsareknowntocausebirth
 defects, but all have the potential to cause harm.
 For example, in 2003, a study found that use of topical
 (local) corticosteroids in the first trimester of pregnancy
 maybeassociated with cleft lip. Thalidomide is known
 to cause defects of the arms and legs; several other
 types also cause problems.
 Alcohol. Drinking large amounts of alcohol while
 pregnant causes a cluster of defects called fetal alco
hol syndrome, which includes mental retardation, heart problems, and growth deficiency. In 2004,
 experts warned that binge drinking early in pregnancy
 was dangerous even if the woman quit drinking later.
 Antibiotics.Certain antibiotics are known tetrato
gens.Tetracycline affects bone growth and discolors
 the teeth.Drugs used to treat tuberculosis can lead to
 hearing problems and damage to a nerve in the head
 (cranial damage).
 Anticonvulsants.Drugs given to prevent seizures can
 cause serious problems in the developing fetus,
 including mental retardation and slow growth.
 Studies inthe UnitedKingdom and Australia have
 tracked the percentage of birth defects cause dby
 certain antiepileptic drugs.
 Anti psychotic and anti anxiety agents.Several drugs
 given for anxiety and mental illness are known to
 cause specific defects.
 Antineoplasticagents. Drugs given to treat cancer
 can cause major congenital malformations, espe
cially central nervous system defects.They also may
 be harmful to the healthcare worker who is giving
 them while pregnant.
 Hormones.Male hormones may cause masculiniza
tion of a female fetus.Asyntheticestrogen(DES)
 given in the 1940s and 1950s caused an increased risk
 of cancer in the adult female children of the mothers
 who received the drug.
 Recreational drugs.Drugs such as LSDhavebeen
 associated with arm and leg abnormalities and cen
tral nervous system problems in infants. Crack
 cocaine also has been associated with birth defects.
 Since drug abusers tend to use many drugs and have
 poor nutrition and prenatalcare, it is hard to deter
mine the effects of individual drugs.  CHEMICALS. Environmental chemicals such as
 fungicides, food additives, and pollutants are sus
pected of causing birth defects, though this is difficult
 to prove.
 RADIATION. Exposureofthemothertohighlevels
 of radiation can cause small skull size (microcephaly),
 blindness, spina bifida,andcleft palate. How severe the
 defect is depends on the duration and timing of the
 exposure.
 INFECTIONS. Three viruses are known to harm a
 developing baby: rubella, cytomegalovirus (CMV),
 and herpes simplex. Toxoplasma gondii, a parasite
 that can be contracted from undercooked meat, from
 dirt, or from handling the feces of infected cats, causes
 serious problems. Untreated syphilis in the mother
 also is harmful.
 Genetic factors
 Ageneisatiny, invisible unit containing informa
tion (DNA) that guides how the body forms andfunc
tions. Each individual inherits tens of thousands of
 genes fromeachparent,arrangedon46chromosomes.
 Genes control all aspects of the body, how it works,
 and all its unique characteristics, including eye color
 and body size. Genes are influenced by chemicals and
 radiation, but sometimes changes in the genes are
 unexplained accidents. Each child gets half of its genes from each parent. In each pair of genes one
 will take precedence (dominant) over the other (reces
sive) in determining each trait, or characteristic. Birth
 defects caused by dominant inheritance include a form
 of dwarfism called achondroplasia; high cholesterol;
 Huntington’s disease, a progressive nervous system
 disorder; Marfan syndrome, which affects connective
 tissue; some forms of glaucoma, andpolydactyly (extra
 fingers or toes).
 If both parents carry the same recessive gene,
 they have a one-in-four chance that the child will
 inherit the disease. Recessive diseases are severe and
 may lead to an early death. They include sickle cell
 anemia, a blood disorder that affects blacks, and
 Tay-Sachs disease, which causes mental retardation
 in people of eastern European Jewish heritage. Two
 recessive disorders that affect mostly whites are:
 cystic fibrosis, a lung and digestive disorder, and
 phenylketonuria (PKU), a metabolic disorder. If only one parent passes along the genes for the disorder, the
 normal gene received from the other parent will
 prevent the disease, but the child will be a carrier.
 Having the gene is not harmful to the carrier, but
 there is the 25% chance of the genetic disease showing
 up in the child of two carriers.
 Some disorders are linked to the sex-determining
 chromosomes passed along by parents. Hemophilia,a
 condition that prevents blood from clotting, and
 Duchenne muscular dystrophy, which causes muscle
 weakness, are carried on the X chromosome. Genetic
 defects also can take place when the egg or sperm are
 forming if the mother or father passes along some
 faulty gene material. This is more common in older
 mothers. The most common defect of this kind is
 Down syndrome, a pattern of mental retardation and
 physical abnormalities, often including heart defects,
 caused by inheriting three copies of a chromosome
 rather than the normal pair.
 A less understood cause of birth defects results
 fromthe interaction of genes from one orbothparents
 plus environmental influences. These defects are
 thought to include:
 Cleft lip and palate, which are malformations of the
 mouth.
 Clubfoot, ankle or foot deformities.
 Spina bifida, an open spine caused when the tube
 that forms the brain and spinal chord does not
 close properly.
 Water on the brain (hydrocephalus), which causes
 brain damage.
 Diabetes mellitus, an abnormality in sugar metabo
lism that appears later in life.
 Heart defects.
 Some forms of cancer.
 A serious illness in the mother, such as an under
active thyroid, or diabetes mellitus, in which her body
 cannot process sugar, also can cause birth defects in the
 child. In fact, in 2003, it was shown that babies of
 diabetic mothers are five times as likely to have struc
tural heart defects as other babies. An abnormal
 amount of amniotic fluid may indicate or cause birth
 defects. Amniotic fluid is the liquid that surrounds and
 protects the unborn child in the uterus. Toolittle of this
 fluid can interfere with lung or limb development. Too
 much amniotic fluid can accumulate if the fetus has a
 disorder that interferes with swallowing. In 2003, a
 study linked the mother’sweighttoriskofbirthdefects.
 Obese women were about three times more likely to
 have an infant with spina bifida or omphalocele
 (protrusion of part of the intestine through the abdom
inal wall) than women of average weight. Women who
 wereoverweightorclassifiedasobesealsoweretwice as
 likely to have an infant with a heart defect or multiple
 birth defects than women classified as average weight.
 Diagnosis
 If there is a family history of birth defects or if the
 mother is over 35 years old, then screening tests can be
 done during pregnancy to gain information about
 the health of the baby.
 Alpha-fetoprotein test. This is a simple blood test
 that measures the level of a substance called alpha
fetoprotein that is associated with some major birth
 defects. An abnormally high or low level may indi
cate the need for further testing.
 Ultrasound. The use of sound waves to examine the
 shape, function, and age of the fetus is a common
 procedure. It also can detect many malformations,
 such as spina bifida, limb defects, and heart and
 kidney problems. In 2003, researchers in England
 announcedanewcombinationofbloodtestsandultra
sound to detect Down syndrome sooner and more
 accurately than with the usual blood screenings done
 at 20weeksofpregnancy.
 Amniocentesis. This test usually is done between the
 13th and15thweeksofpregnancy.Asmallsampleof
 amniotic fluid is withdrawn through a thin needle
 inserted into the mother’s abdomen. Chromosomal
 analysis can rule out Down syndrome and other
 genetic conditions.
 Chorionic villus sampling (CVS). This test can be
 done as early as the ninth week of pregnancy to
 identify chromosome disorders and some genetic
 conditions. A thin needle is inserted through the
 abdomen or a slim tube is inserted through the
 vagina that takes a tiny tissue sample for testing.
 If a birth defect is suspected after a baby is born,
 then confirmation of the diagnosis is very important.
 Thepatient’s medical records andmedical history may
 hold essential information. A careful physical exami
nation and laboratory tests should be done. Special
 diagnostic tests also can provide genetic informa
tion in some cases. In 2003, the March of Dimes, a
 nonprofit organization, recommendedthateverybaby
 born in the United States receive, at minimum, screen
ing for the same core group of birth defects including
 phenylketonuria, congenital adrenal hyperplasia, con
genital hypothryroidism, biotinidase deficiency, and
 others. They were concerned that newborn screening
 varied too much from state to state. 
 Treatment depends on the type ofbirth defect and
 how serious it is. When an abnormality has been
 identified before birth, delivery can be planned at a
 health care facility that is prepared to offer any special
 care needed. Some abnormalities can be corrected
 with surgery. Experimental procedures have been
 used successfully in correcting some defects, like
 excessive fluid in the brain (hydrocephalus), even
 before the baby is born. Early reports have shown
 success with fetal surgery on spina bifida patients.
 By operating on these fetuses while still in the womb,
 surgeons have prevented the need for shunts and
 improved outcomes at birth for many newborns.
 However, long-term studies still are needed. Patients
 with complicated conditions usually need the help of
 experienced medical and educational specialists with
 an understanding of the disorder.
 Prognosis
 The prognosis for a disorder varies with the spe
cific condition.
 Prevention
 Pregnant women should eat a nutritious diet.
 Taking folic acid supplements before and during preg
nancy reduces the risk of having a baby with serious
 problems of the brain or spinal chord (neural tube
 defects). It is important to avoid any teratogen that
 can harm the developing baby, including alcohol and
 drugs. When there is a family history of congenital
 defects in either parent, genetic counseling and testing
 can help parents plan for future children. Often, coun
selors can determine the risk of a genetic condition
 occurring and the availability of tests for it. Talking to
 a genetic counselor after a child is born with a defect
 can provide parents with information about medical
 management and available community resources.