 Definition
 Black lung disease is the common name for coal
 workers’ pneumoconiosis (CWP) or anthracosis, a
 lung disease of older workers in the coal industry,
 caused by inhalation, over many years, of small
 amounts of coal dust.
 Description
 The risk of having black lung disease is directly
 related to the amount of dust inhaled over the years; the disease typically affects workers over age 50.
 Its commonnamecomesfromthefactthatthe inhala
tion of heavy deposits of coal dust makes miners lungs
 look black instead of a healthy pink. Although people
 who live in cities often have some black deposits in
 their lungs from polluted air, coal miners have much
 more extensive deposits.
 In the years since the federal government has
 regulated dust levels in coal mines, the number of
 cases of black lung disease has fallen sharply. Since
 the Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Act of 1969,
 average dust levels have fallen from 8.0 mg. per cubic
 meter to the current standard of 2.0 mg. per cubic
 meter. The 1969 law also set up a black lung disability
 benefits program to compensate coal miners who have
 been disabled by on-the-job dust exposure.
 Despite the technology available to control the
 hazard, however, miners still run the risk of develop
ing this lung disease. The risk is much lower today,
 however; fewer than 10% of coal miners have any x
 ray evidence of coal dust deposits. When there is such
 evidence, it often shows up as only small black spots
 less than 0.4 in (1 cm). in diameter, and may have been
 caused by smoking rather than coal dust. This condi
tion is called ‘‘simple CWP’’ and does not lead to
 symptoms or disability.
 Causes and symptoms
 Since the particles of fine coal dust, which a miner
 breathes when he is in the mines, cannot be destroyed
 within the lungs or removed from them, builds up.
 Eventually, this build-up causes thickening and scarring, making the lungs less efficient in supplying
 oxygen to the blood.
 The primary symptom of the disease is shortness
 of breath, which gradually gets worse as the disease
 progresses. In severe cases, the patient may develop
 cor pulmonale, an enlargement and strain of the right
 side of the heart caused by chronic lung disease. This
 may eventually cause right-sided heart failure.
 Some patients develop emphysema (a disease in
 which the tiny air sacs in the lungs become damaged,
 leading to shortness of breath, and respiratory and
 heart failure) as a complication of black lung disease.
 Others develop a severe type of black lung disease
 called progressive massive fibrosis, in which damage
 continues in the upper parts of the lungs even after
 exposure to the dust has ended. Scientists aren’t sure
 what causes this serious complication. Some think
 that it may be due to the breathing of a mixture of
 coal and silica dust that is found in certain mines.
 Silica is far more likely to lead to scarring than coal
 dust alone.
 Diagnosis
 Black lung disease can bediagnosed by checking a
 patient’s history for exposure to coal dust, followed by
 a chest x-ray to discover if the characteristic spots in
 the lungs caused by coal dust are present. A pulmonary
 function test may aid in diagnosis.
 X rays can detect black lung disease before it
 causes any symptoms. If exposure to the dust is  stopped at that point, progression of the disease may
 be prevented.
 Treatment
 There is no treatment or cure for this condition,
 although it is possible to treat complications such as
 lung infections and cor pulmonale. Further exposure
 to coal dust must be stopped.
 Prognosis
 Those miners with simple CWP can lead anormal
 life. However, patients who develop black lung disease
 at an early age, or who have progressive massive
 fibrosis, have a higher risk of premature death.
 Prevention
 The only way to prevent black lung disease is to
 avoid long-term exposure to coal dust. Coal mines
 mayhelppreventthecondition by lowering coal dust
 levels and providing protective clothes to coal
 miners.
 A light micrograph of a human lung containing
 particles of inspired coal dust (anthracosis). The black
 masses shown are groups of coal dust particles. 