 Definition
 Bladder stones are crystalline masses that form
 from the minerals and proteins, which naturally
 occur in urine. These types of stones are much less
 common than kidney stones.
 Description
 Bladder stones can form anywhere in the urinary
 tract beforedepositinginthebladder.Theybeginastiny
 granules about the size of a grain of sand, but they can
 grow to more than an inch in diameter. These stones
 can block the flow of urine causing pain and difficulty
 with urination. They can also scratch the bladder
 wall, which may lead to bleeding or infection. 
  Causes and symptoms
 While theexact causes ofthe formationof bladder
 stones are not completely understood, bladder stones
 usually occur because of urinary tract infection (UTI),
 obstruction of the urinary tract, enlargement of the
 prostate gland in men, or the presence of foreign
 bodies in the urinary tract. Diet and the amount of
 fluid intake also appear to be important factors in the
 development of bladder stones.
 Ninety-five percent of all bladder stones occur
 in men, most of who have an enlarged prostate gland or
 a UTI. These stones are rarely seen in children or
 in African Americans. People with gout may deve
lop bladder stones composedalmostentirely of uric acid.
 The symptoms of bladder stones may become
 evident when the wall of the bladder is scratched or
 when the urinary tract becomes obstructed by the
 stone. These symptoms include:
 abnormally dark colored urine
 blood in the urine
 difficulty urinating
 frequent urge to urinate
 lower abdominal pain
 pain or discomfort in the penis
 Somepeoplewithbladderstonesalso mayexperi
ence an inability to control urination (urinary
 incontinence).
 Diagnosis
 The diagnosis of bladder stones is usually made
 after a physical examination, which may include a
 rectal examination to check for enlargement of the
 prostate gland. Urine tests are then used to determine if there is blood or indications of an UTI inthe urine. If
 bladder stones are suspected, bladder or pelvic x rays
 may be ordered. Stones that are large enough to cause
 problems with urinary function are almost always
 detectable by x ray.
 Treatment
 Many bladder stones can be passed out of the
 body in the urine. People with small bladder stones
 will be asked to increase their fluid intakes to at least
 six to eight eight-ounce glasses of water per day to
 increase urinary output. If the stones do not pass
 after two weeks, or if the patient’s symptoms become
 worse, further medical treatment may be required.
 Alargebladderstone,orsmallstonethatthepatient
 cannot pass in the urine, may be broken up into smaller
 stones using ultrasound (shock waves). These smaller
 stones may then pass in the urine. Stones that cannot
 be broken into pieces by these methods, or that the
 patient cannot pass, may have to be surgically removed.
 Alternative treatment
 Traditional herbal remedies for bladder stones
 include celery seed and horsetail. Also, because incom
plete bladderemptyingmaycausebladderstones,many
 patients may benefit from methodsandremediesaimed
 at improving overall bladder function. These include
 Kegel exercises, which are used to strengthen the
 muscles involved in urination; herbal supplements
 (cornsilk, hydrangea, juniper berries, parsley, and uva
 ursi) used to increase urine flow and flush out sediment
 from the bladder; and, the consumption of cranberry
 juice and/or fresh, unsweetened, lemon juice.
 Cranberry juice helps to control urinary tract infection
 and contains a chemical that coats the walls of the
 bladder, making them more resistant to infection.
 Lemon juice helps to flush out the urinary system.
 Prognosis
 Mostbladderstones canbe,andare,passedoutof
 the body in the urine without any permanent damage
 to the bladder or the rest of the urinary tract.
 However, most bladder stones arise from an under
lying medical condition. Therefore, if this medical
 condition is not corrected approximately half of all
 patients will experience a recurrence of bladder stones
 within five years.
 Prevention
 Bladder stones may, in some cases, be prevented
 by the patient receiving prompt medical treatment for
 an enlarged prostate gland or UTI. The consumption
 of at least six to eight eight-ounce glasses of water per
 dayand/or theregular consumption of cranberryjuice
 may help to prevent recurrences of bladder stones. 