 Definition
 Blastomycosis is an infection caused by inhaling
 microscopic particles (spores) produced by the fungus
 Blastomyces dermatitidis. Blastomycosis may belimited
 to the lungs or also involve the skin and bones. In its
 most severe form, the infection can spread throughout
 the body and involve many organ systems (systemic).
 Description
 Blastomycosis is a fungal infection caused by
 Blastomyces dermatitidis. Although primarily an air
borne disease, farmers and gardeners may become
 infected from contact with spores in the soil through
 cuts and scrapes. The fungus that causes the disease is
 found in moist soil and wood in the southeastern
 United States, the Mississippi River valley, southern
 Canada, and Central America. Blastomycosis is also
 called Gilchrist’s disease, Chicago disease, or North
 American blastomycosis. Another South and Central
 American disease, paracoccidioidomycosis, is some
times called South American blastomycosis, but
 despite the similar name, this disease is substantially
 different from NorthAmerican blastomycosis.Canine
 blastomycosis, a common dogdisease,iscaused bythe
 same fungus that infects humans. However, people do
 not get this disease from their dogs except only very
 rarely through dog bites.
 Blastomycosis is a rare disease infecting only
 about 4 in every 100,000 people. It is at least six
 times more common in men than in women and
 tends to more often infect children and individuals in
 the 30–50 year old age group. People who have diabetes mellitus or who are taking drugs that sup
press the immune system (immunocompromised) are
 more likely to develop blastomycosis. Although peo
ple with AIDS can get blastomycosis because of their
 weakenedimmunesystem,blastomycosis hasnotbeen
 one of the more common fungal infections associated
 with AIDS.
 Causes and symptoms
 Once inhaled, the spores of B. dermatitidis can
 lodge in the lungs and cause a localized inflammation.
 This is known as primary pulmonary blastomycosis.
 The disease does not spread from one person to
 another. In the early stages, symptoms may include a
 drycough,fever, heavysweating,fatigue, andageneral
 feeling of ill health. In approximately 25% of blasto
mycosis cases, only the lungs are affected. As the dis
ease progresses, small lesions form in the lungs causing
 the air sacs deep within the lungs (alveoli) to break
 down and form small cavities.
 In another 35%, the disease involves both the
 lungs and the skin. Bumps develop on the skin,
 gradually becoming small, white, crusted blisters
 filled with pus. The blisters break open, creating
 abscesses that do not heal. Approximately 19% of
 infected people have skin sores without infection in
 the lungs.
 The remaining approximately 20% of the
 infected population has blastomycosis that has
 spread or disseminated to other systems of the
 body. Symptoms may include pain and lesions on
 one or more bones, the male genitalia, and/or parts
 of the central nervous system. The liver, spleen,
 lymph nodes, heart, adrenal glands, and digestive
 system may also be infected.
 Diagnosis
 Apositivediagnosisofblastomycosisismadewhen
 the fungus B. dermatitidis is identified by direct micro
scopic examination of body fluids such as sputum and
 prostate fluid or in tissue samples (biopsies) from the
 lung or skin. Another way to diagnose blastomycosis is
 to culture and isolate the fungus from a sample of
 sputum. Chest x rays are used to assess lung damage,
 but alone cannot lead to a definitive diagnosis of blas
tomycosis because any damage caused by other dis
eases, such as by pneumonia or tuberculosis, may
 appear look on the x ray. Because its symptoms vary
 widely, blastomycosis is often misdiagnosed.
 Treatment
 Blastomycosis must be treated or it will gradually
 lead to death. Treatment with the fungicidal drug
 ketoconazole (Nizoral) taken orally is effective in
 about 75% of patients. Amphotericin B (Fungizone)
 given intravenously is also very effective, but it has
 more toxic side effects than ketoconazole. Treatment
 with amphotericin B usually requires hospitalization,
 and the patient may also receive other drugs to mini
mize the its side effects. 
Alternative treatment
 Bleeding time
 Alternative treatment for fungal infections
 focuses on creating an internal environment where
 the fungus cannot survive. This is accomplished by
 eating a diet low in dairy products, sugars, including
 honey and fruit juice, and foods like beer that contain
 yeast. This is complemented by a diet consisting, in
 large part, of uncooked and unprocessed foods.
 Supplements of vitamins C, E, A-plus, and B complex
 may also be useful. Lactobacillus acidophilus and
 Bifidobacterium will replenish the good bacteria in
 the intestines. Some antifungal herbs, like garlic
 (Allium sativum), can be consumed in relatively large
 doses and for an extended period of time in order to
 increase effectiveness. A variety of antifungal herbs,
 such as myrrh (Commiphora molmol), tea tree oil
 (Melaleuca spp.), citrus seed extract, pau d’arco tea
 (Tabebuia impetiginosa), and garlic may also be
 applied directly to the infected skin.
 Prognosis
 Left untreated, blastomycosis gradually leads to
 death. When treated, however, patients begin to
 improve within one week and, with intensive treat
ment, may be cured within several weeks. The highest
 rate of recovery is among patients who only have skin
 lesions. People with the disseminated form of the dis
ease are least likely to be cured and and most likely to
 suffer a relapse.
 Prevention
 Because the fungus that causes blastomycosis is
 airborne and microscopic, the only form of preven
tion is to avoid visiting areas where it is found in the
 soil. For many people this is impractical. Since the
 disease is rare, people who maintain general good
 health do not need to worry much about infection.