 Definition
 Bleeding varices are bleeding, dilated (swollen)
 veins in the esophagus (gullet), or the upper part of
 the stomach, caused by liver disease.
 Description
 Engorgedveins are called varices (plural of varix).
 Varices may occur in the lining of the esophagus, the
 tube that connects the mouth to the stomach, or in the
 upper part of the stomach. Such varices are called
 esophageal varices. These varices are fragile and can
 bleed easily because veins are not designed to handle
 high internal pressures. 
 Causes and symptoms
 Bleeding varices
 Liver disease often causes an increase in the
 blood pressure in the main veins that carry blood
 from the stomach and intestines to the liver (portal
 veins). As the pressure in the portal veins increases,
 the veins of the stomach and esophagus swell, until
 theyeventuallybecomevarices.Bleedingvaricesarea
 life-threatening complication of thisincrease inblood
 pressure (portal hypertension). The most common
 cause of bleeding varices is cirrhosis of the liver
 caused by chronic alcohol abuse or hepatitis.
 Bleeding varices occur in approximately one in
 every 10,000 people.
 Symptoms of bleeding varices include:
 vomiting blood, sometimes in massive amounts
 black, tarry stools
 decreased urine output
 excessive thirst
 nausea
 vomiting
 blood in the vomit
 If bleeding from the varices is severe, a patient
 may go into shock from the loss of blood, character
ized by pallor, a rapid and weak pulse, rapid and
 shallow respiration, and lowered systemic blood
 pressure.
 Diagnosis
 Bleeding varices may be suspected in a patient
 who has any of the above-mentioned symptoms, and
 who has either been diagnosed with cirrhosis of the
 liver or who has a history of prolonged alcohol abuse.
 The definitive diagnosis is established via a specialized
 type of endoscopy, namely, esophagogastroduodeno
scopy (EGD), a procedure that involves the visual
 examination of the lining of the esophagus, stomach,
 and upper duodenum with a flexible fiberoptic
 endoscope.
 Treatment
 The objective during treatment of bleeding
 varices is to stop and/or prevent bleeding and to
 restore/maintain normal blood circulation through
out the body. Patients with severe bleeding should be
 treated in intensive care since uncontrolled bleeding
 can lead to death.
 Initial treatment of bleeding varices begins
 with standard resuscitation, including intravenous  fluids and blood transfusions as needed. Definitive
 treatment is usually endoscopic, with the endo
scope used to locate the sites of the bleeding. An
 instrument, inserted along with the endoscope, is
 used either to inject these sites with a clotting agent
 or to tie off the bleeding sites with tiny rubber
 bands.  Repeated endoscopic treatments (usually four/
 six) are generally required to eliminate the varices
 andtoprevent the recurrence of bleeding. These endo
scopic techniques are successful in about 90 percent
 of cases.
 Patients who cannot be treated endoscopically
 may be considered for an alternative procedure called
 TIPS (transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt).
 This procedure involves placing a hollow metal
 tube (shunt) in the liver connecting the portal veins
 with the hepatic veins (veins that leave the liver and
 drain to the heart). This shunt lowers the pressure in
 the portal veins and prevents bleeding and portal
 hypertension. The TIPS procedure is performed by a
 radiologist and has become an accepted method for
 reducing portal vein pressure since 1992. Although the
 procedure continues to evolve, TIPS can routinely be
 created in more than 93% of patients.
 Medications aimed at controlling bleeding
 may also be prescribed. These include propanolol,
 vasopressin, octreotide acetate, and isosorbide
 mononitrate.
 Alternative treatment
 Somealternative treatments are aimed at prevent
ing the cirrhosis of the liver that often causes bleeding
 varices andmostareeffective. However, onceapatient
 has reached the bleeding varice stage, standard inter
vention to stop the bleeding is required or the patient
 may die.
 Prognosis
 Bleeding varices represent one of the most feared
 complications of portal hypertension. They contribute
 to the estimated 32,000 deaths per year attributed to
 cirrhosis. Half or moreof patientswhosurviveepisodes
 of bleeding varices are at risk of renewed esophageal
 bleeding during the first one to two years. The risk of
 recurrence can be lowered by endoscopic and drug
 treatment. Prognosis is usually more related to the
 underlyingliverdisease.Approximately30to50percent
 of people with bleeding varices will die from this con
dition within the six weeks of the first bleeding episode.
 Prevention
 The best way to possibly prevent the development
 or recurrence of bleeding varices is to eliminate the risk
 factors for cirrhosis of the liver. The most common
 cause of cirrhosis is prolonged alcohol abuse, and alco
holconsumptionmustbecompletelyeliminated.People
 with hepatitis B or hepatitis C also have an increased
 risk of developing cirrhosis of the liver. Vaccination
 against hepatitis B and avoidance of intravenous drug
 usage reduce the risk of contracting hepatitis.