Definition
 Bleeding time is a crude test of hemostasis (the arrest
 or stopping of bleeding). It indicates how well platelets
 interact with blood vessel walls to form blood clots.
 Purpose
 Bleeding time is used most often to detect quali
tative defects of platelets, such as Von Willebrand’s
 disease. The test helps identify people who have
 defects in their platelet function. This is the ability
 of blood to clot following a wound or trauma.
 Normally, platelets interact with the walls of blood
 vessels to cause a blood clot. There are many factors
 in the clotting mechanism, and they are initiated by
 platelets. The bleeding time test is usually used on
 patients who have a history of prolonged bleeding
 after cuts, or who have a family history of bleeding
 disorders. Also, the bleeding time test is sometimes
 performed as a preoperative test to determine a
 patient’s likely bleeding response during and after
 surgery. However, in patients with no history of
 bleeding problems, or who are not taking anti
inflammatory drugs, the bleeding time test is not
 usually necessary.
 Precautions
 Before administering the test, patients should be
 questioned about what medications they may be
 taking. Some medications will adversely affect the
 results of the bleeding time test. These medications
 include anticoagulants, diuretics, anticancer drugs, sul
fonamides, thiazide, aspirin and aspirin-containing
 preparations, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
 drugs. The test may also be affected by anemia (a
 deficiency in red blood cells). Since the taking of
 aspirin or related drugs are the most common cause
 of prolonged bleeding time, no aspirin should be taken
 two weeks prior to the test.
 Description
 There are four methods to perform the bleeding
 test. The Ivy method is the traditional format for this
 test. In the Ivy method, a blood pressure cuff is
 placed on the upper arm and inflated to 40 mM
 Hg. A lancet or scalpel blade is used to make a stab
 wound on the underside of the forearm. An auto
matic, spring-loaded blade device is most commonly
 used to make a standard-sized cut. The area stabbed  is selected so that no superficial or visible veins are
 cut. These veins, because of their size, may have
 longer bleeding times, especially in people with
 bleeding defects. The time from when the stab
 wound is made until all bleeding has stopped is
 measured and is called the bleeding time. Every 30
 seconds, filter paper or a paper towel is used to draw
 off the blood. The test is finished when bleeding has
 stopped completely.
 The three other methods of performing the bleed
ing test are the template, modified template, and Duke
 methods. The template and modified template meth
ods are variations of the Ivy method. Abloodpressure
 cuff is used and the skin on the forearm prepared as in
 the Ivy method. A template is placed over the area to
 be stabbed and two incisions are made in the forearm
 using the template as a location guide. The main dif
ference between thetemplateandthemodifiedmethod
 is the length of the cut made.
 For the Duke method, a nick is made in an ear
 lobe or a fingertip is pricked to cause bleeding. As in
 the Ivy method, the test is timed from the start of
 bleeding until bleeding is completely stopped. The
 disadvantage to the Duke method is that the pressure
 on the blood veins in the stab area is not constant and
 the results achieved are less reliable. The advantage to
 the Dukemethod is that no scar remains after the test.
 The other methods may result in a tiny, hairline scar
 where the wound was made. However, this is largely a
 cosmetic concern.
 Preparation
 There is no special preparation required of the
 patient for this test. The area to be stabbed should be
 wiped clean with an alcohol pad. The alcohol should
 be left on the skin long enough for it to kill bacteria at
 the wound site. The alcohol must be removed before
 stabbing the arm because alcohol will adversely affect
 the tests results by inhibiting clotting.
 Aftercare
 If a prolonged bleeding time is caused by unknown
 factors or diseases, further testing is required to identify
 the exact cause of the bleeding problem.
 Anormal bleeding time for the Ivy method is less
 than five minutes from the time of the stab until all
 bleeding from the wound stops. Some texts extend the
 normal range to eight minutes. Normal values for the
 template method range up to eight minutes, while for
 the modified template methods, up to 10 minutes is
 considered normal. Normal for the Duke method is
 three minutes.
 Abnormal results
 A bleeding time that is longer than normal is an
 abnormal result. The test should be stopped if the
 patient hasn’t stopped bleeding by 20-30 minutes.
 Bleeding time is longer when the normal function of
 platelets is impaired, or there are a lower-than-normal
 number of platelets in the blood.
 Alonger-than-normal bleeding time can indicate
 that one of several defects in hemostasis is present,
 including severe thrombocytopenia, platelet dysfunc
tion, vascular defects, Von Willebrand’s disease, or
 other abnormalities.