 Definition
 Blood donation refers to the process of collecting,
 testing, preparing, and storing blood and blood com
ponents. Donors are most commonly unpaid volun
teers, but they may also be paid by commercial
 enterprises. Blood registry refers to the collection and
 sharing of data about donated blood and ineligible
 donors.
 Purpose
 The purpose of the blood collection and distribu
tion system is to help ensure an adequate supply of
 blood for accident victims, people needing surgery,
 and people suffering from certain diseases, as well as
 for medical research.
 Sometimes, donors give blood specifically to
 benefit a particular person. People preparing for elec
tive surgery may donate their own blood to be held
 and then returned to them during surgery. This is
 known as autologous blood donation. Directed
 donor blood has been donated by someone known to the intended recipient, such as a family member or
 friend.
 Each year, more than four million Americans
 receive blood transfusions involving more than
 26 million units of blood (one unit equals 450 milli
liters, or about one pint), or an average of about
 32,000 units per day. All of that blood must be
 collected, tested, prepared, stored, and delivered
 to the appropriate sites. Roughly eight million
 people in the United States donate blood each year;
 about half of the total amount needed is provided
 by the 36 regional blood centers of the American
 Red Cross.
 Whole blood and the various blood components
 have many uses. Red blood cells, which carry oxygen,
 are used to treat anemia. Platelets, which play a role in
 controlling bleeding, are commonly used in the treat
ment of leukemia and other cancers. Fresh frozen
 plasma is also used to control bleeding in people defi
cient in certain clotting factors. Cryoprecipitated
 AHF, made from fresh frozen plasma, contains a few
 specific clotting factors.
 Precautions
 To ensure the safety of the blood supply, a multi
tiered process of donor screening and deferral is
 employed. This involves donor education, taking a
 detailed health history of each prospective donor, and
 giving potential donors a simple physical examination
 (which includes taking a few drops of blood to test for
 anemia). At any point in the process, a potential donor
 maybe‘‘deferred,’’ or judged ineligible to donate blood.
 This deferral may be temporary or permanent, depend
ing on the reason. Potential donors are also encouraged
 to ‘‘self-defer,’’ or voluntarily decline to donate, rather
 than put future blood recipients at risk.
 All donated blood is extensively tested before
 being used. The first step is determining the blood
 type, which indicates who can receive the blood.
 Receiving the wrong type of blood can cause
 death. Blood is also screened for any antibodies that
 could cause complications for recipients. In addition,
 blood is tested to screen out donors infected with
 the following diseases: Hepatitis B surface antigen
 ADD, hepatitis B core antibody, hepatitis C
 virus antibody, HIV-1 and HIV-2 antibody, HIV p24
 antigen, HTLV-I and HTLV-II antibodies, and
 syphilis. Nucleic Acid Amplification testing is also
 performed, and other tests may be done if a doctor
 requests them.
 In order to detect the greatest possible number of
 infections, these screening tests are extremely sensi
tive. For this reason, however, donors sometimes
 receive false positive test results. In these cases,
 more specific confirmatory tests are performed, to
 help rule out false positive results. Blood found to
 be abnormal is discarded, and all items coming into
 direct contact with donors are used only once and
 then discarded. Donors of infected blood are entered
 into the Donor Deferral Register, a confidential
 national data base used to prevent deferred people
 from donating blood.
 In general, blood donors must be at least 17 years
 old (somestates allow younger peopleto donateblood
 with their parents’ consent), must weigh at least 110
 pounds (50kg), and must be in good health.
 Many factors can temporarily or permanently
 disqualify potential donors. Most of them have to
 do with having engaged in behaviors that put them
 at risk of infection or having spent time in certain
 specified areas. Amongthese factorsare havinghada
 tattoo, having had sex with people in high-risk
 groups, having had certain diseases, and having
 been raped.
 Description
 There are eight different blood types in all—four
 ABOgroups,eachofwhichmaybeeitherRhpositive
 or Rh negative. These types, and their approximate
 distribution in the U.S. population, are as follows:
 O+(38%), O- (7%), A+ (34%), A- (6%), B+ (9%),
 B- (2%), AB+ (3%), AB- (1%). In an emergency,
 anyone can safely receive type O red blood cells,
 and people with this blood type are known as
 ‘‘universal donors.’’ People with type AB blood,
 known as ‘‘universal recipients,’’ can receive any type
 of red blood cells and can give plasma to all blood
 types. Blood donations can be made in community
 blood centers, at hospitals or in bloodmobiles, which
 visit schools, churches and workplaces. The actual
 process of donating whole blood takes about 20
 minutes. A sterile needle is inserted into a vein in the
 donor’s arm. The blood flows through plastic tubing
 into a blood bag. Donors may be asked to clench their
 fist to encourage blood to flow. Usually, one unit of
 blood is collected. Afterward, donors are escorted to
 an observation area, given light refreshments, and
 allowed to rest.
 Plasma,theliquidportionofthebloodinwhichred
 blood cells, platelets and other elements are suspended,
 is also collected, often by commercial enterprises that
 sell it to companies manufacturing clotting factors and
 other blood products. This is done using a process
 known as apheresis, in which whole blood is coll
ected, the desired blood component is removed, and
 the remainder is returned to the donor. Collecting
 plasma generally takes one to two hours. Apheresis
 may also be used to collect other blood components,
 such as platelets and granulocytes.
 Preparation
 Oncewholebloodhasbeencollected, it is sent to a
 lab for testing and processing. Most donated blood is
 separated into its constituent components, such as red
 bloodcells, platelets, and cryoprecipitate. This enables
 more than one person to benefit from the same unit of
 donated blood.
 Different blood components vary in how long
 they can be stored. Red blood cells can be refrigerated
 for up to 42 days or frozen for as much as 10 years.
 Platelets, stored at room temperature, may be kept for
 up to five days. Fresh frozen plasma and cryoprecipi
tated AHF can be kept for as much as one year.
 Aftercare
 It generally takes about 24 hours for the donor’s
 body to replenish the lost fluid. Replacing the lost red
 blood cells, however, may take as much as two
 months. Whole blood donors must wait a minimum
 of eight weeks before donating again. Some states
 place further limits on the frequency and/or total
 number of times an individual may donate blood
 within a 12-month period.
 Risks
 Thanks to the use of a multi-tiered screening
 system and advances in the effectiveness of
 screening tests, the transmission of infectious dis
eases via transfusion has been significantly dimin
ished. Nonetheless, there is still a minuscule risk
 that blood recipients could contract HIV, Hepatitis
 C or other infections via transfusion. Other diseases
 that could conceivably be contracted in this way, or
 that are of particular concern to blood-collection
 agencies, include babesiosis,Chagasdisease,HTLV
I and-II, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, cytomegalo
virus, Lyme disease, malaria, and new variant
 Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.
 Autologousblooddonorsrunatinyriskofhaving
 the wrongbloodreturnedtothemduetoclerical error.
 There is also a faint possibility of bacterial contamina
tion of the autologous blood.
 Normal results
 Formostdonors,theprocessis quickandpainless
 and they leave feeling fine. They may also find satis
faction in knowing that they have contributed to the
 nation’s blood supply and may even have helped save
 lives.
 Abnormal results
 Most blood donors suffer no significant afteref
fects. Occasionally, however, donors feel faint or
 dizzy, nauseous, and/or have pain, redness, or a bruise
 where the blood was taken. More serious complica
tions, which rarely occur, include fainting, muscle
 spasms, and nerve damage.