Definition
 Blood typing is a laboratory test done to deter
mineaperson’sbloodtype.Ifthepersonneedsablood
 transfusion, another test called crossmatching is done
 after the blood is typed to find blood from a donor
 that the person’s body will accept.
 Purpose
 Blood typing and crossmatching are most com
monlydonetomakecertain that apersonwhoneedsa
 transfusion will receive blood that matches (is compa
tible with) his own. People must receive blood of the
 same blood type, otherwise, a serious, even fatal,
 transfusion reaction can occur.
 Parents whoareexpectingababyhavetheirblood
 typed to diagnose andprevent hemolytic disease of the
 newborn (HDN), a type of anemia also known as
 erythroblastosis fetalis. Babies who have a blood type
 different from their mothers are at risk for developing
 this disease. The disease is serious with certain blood
 type differences, but is milder with others.
 Achild inherits factors or genes from each parent
 that determine his blood type. This fact makes blood
 typing useful in paternity testing. To determine
 whether or not the alleged father could be the true
 father, the blood types of the child, mother, and
 alleged father are compared.
 Legal investigations may require typing of blood
 or other body fluids, such as semen or saliva, to iden
tify persons involved in crimes or other legal matters.
 Description
 Blood typing and crossmatching tests are per
formed in a blood bank laboratory by technologists
 trained in blood bank and transfusion services. The
 tests are done onblood,after it has separated into cells
 and serum (serum is the yellow liquid left after the
 blood clots.) Costs for both tests are covered by insur
ance when the tests are determined to be medically
 necessary.
 Blood bank laboratories are usually located in
 facilities, such as those operated by the American
 Red Cross, that collect, process, and supply blood
 that is donated, as well as in facilities, such as most
 hospitals, that prepare blood for transfusion. These
 laboratories are regulated by the United States Food
 and Drug Administration (FDA) and are often
 inspected and accredited by a professional association
 such as the American Association of Blood Banks
 (AABB).
 Blood typing and crossmatching tests are based
 on the reaction between antigens and antibodies. An
 antigen can beanythingthatcauses thebodytolaunch
 an attack, known as an immune response, against it.
 The attack begins when the body builds a special
 protein, called an antibody, that is uniquely designed
 to attack and make ineffective (neutralize) the specific
 antigen that caused the attack. A person’s body nor
mally doesn’t make antibodies against its own anti
gens, only against antigens that are foreign to it.
 Aperson’s bodycontains many antigens.The anti
gens found on the surface of red blood cells are impor
tant because they determine a person’s blood type.
 When red blood cells having a certain blood type anti
gen are mixed withs erum containing antibodies against  that antigen, the antibodies attack and stick to the
 antigen. In a test tube, this reaction is observed as the
 formation of clumps of cells (clumping).
 When blood is typed, a person’s cells and serum
 are mixed in a test tube with commercially-prepared
 serum and cells. Clumping tells which antigens or
 antibodies are present and reveals the person’s blood
 type. When blood is crossmatched, patient serum
 is mixed with cells from donated blood that might be
 used for transfusion. Clumping or lack of clumping
 in the test tube tells whether or not the blood is
 compatible.
 Although there are over 600 known red blood cell
 antigens, organized into 22 blood group systems, rou
tine blood typing and crossmatching is usually con
cerned with only two systems: the ABO and Rh blood
 group systems.
 Blood typing
 ABO BLOOD GROUP SYSTEM. In 1901, Karl
 Landsteiner, an Austrian pathologist, randomly com
bined the serum and red blood cells of his colleagues.
 From the reactions he observed in test tubes, he dis
covered the ABO blood group system. This discovery
 earned him the 1930 Nobel Prize in Medicine.
 A person’s ABO blood type–A, B, AB, or O–is
 based on the presence or absence of the A and B
 antigens on his red blood cells. The A blood type has
 only the A antigen and the B blood type has only the
 B antigen. The AB blood type has both A and B
 antigens, and the O blood type has neither A nor B
 antigen.
 By the time a person is six months old, he natu
rally will have developed antibodies against the anti
gens his red blood cells lack. That is, a person with A
 blood type will have anti-B antibodies, and a person
 with B blood type will have anti-A antibodies. A per
sonwithABbloodtypewillhaveneitherantibody,but
 a person with O blood type will have both anti-A and
 anti-B antibodies. Although the distribution of each of
 the four ABO blood types varies between racial groups, O is the most common and AB is the least
 common.
 ABOtyping is the first test done on blood when it
 is tested for transfusion. A person must receive ABO
matched blood. ABO incompatibilities are the major
 cause of fatal transfusion reactions. ABO antigens are
 also found on most body organs, so ABO compatibil
ity is also important for organ transplants.
 An ABO incompatibility between a pregnant
 woman and her baby is a minor cause of HDN and
 usually causes no problem for the baby. The structure
 of ABOantibodiesmakesitunlikelytheywillcrossthe
 placenta to attack the baby’s red blood cells.
 Paternity testing compares the ABO bloodtypes of
 the child, mother, and alleged father. The alleged father
 can’t be the true father if the child’s blood type requires
 a gene that neither he nor the mother have. For exam
ple, a child with blood type B whose mother has blood
 typeO,requiresafatherwitheitherABorBbloodtype;
 a manwith blood type O cannot be the true father.
 In some people, ABO antigens can be found in
 body fluids other than blood, such as saliva and
 semen. ABO typing of these fluids provides clues in
 legal investigations.
 RH BLOOD GROUP SYSTEM. The Rh, or Rhesus,
 system was first detected in 1940 by Landsteiner and
 Wiener when they injected blood from rhesus monkeys
 into guinea pigs andrabbits. Morethan50antigenshave
 since been discovered belonging to this system, making
 it the most complex red blood cell antigen system.
 In routine blood typing and crossmatching tests,
 only one of these 50 antigens, the D antigen, also
 known as the Rh factor or Rho[D], is tested for.
 If the D antigen is present, that person is Rh-positive;
 if the D antigen is absent, that person is Rh-negative.
 Other important antigens in the Rh system are C,
 c, E, and e. These antigens are not usually tested for in
 routine blood typing tests. However, testing for the
 presence of these antigens is useful in paternity testing,
 and when a technologist tries to identify unexpected Rh antibodies or find matching blood for a person
 with antibodies to one or more of these antigens.
 Unlike the ABO system, antibodies to Rh anti
gens don’t develop naturally.They develop only as an
 immune response after a transfusion or during
 pregnancy.
 The incidence of the Rh blood types varies
 between racial groups,but not as widely as the ABO
 bloodtypes:85% of whites and 90% of blacks are
 Rh-positive; 15% of whites and 10% of blacks are
 Rh-negative.
 Intransfusions, the Rh system is next in impor
tance after the ABO system.Most Rh-negative people
 who receive Rh-positive blood will develop anti-D
 antibodies.A later transfusion of Rh-positive blood
 could result in a severe or fatal transfusion reaction.
 Rh incompatibility is the most common and
 severe cause of HDN. This incompatibility can
 happenwhen an Rh-negative woman and an Rh
positive man produce an Rh-positive baby. Cells
 from the baby can cross the placenta and enter the
 mother’s bloodstream, causing the mother to make
 anti-Dantibodies. Unlike ABO antibodies,the struc
ture of anti-Dantibodies makes it likely that they will
 cross the placenta and enter the baby’s bloodstream.
 There, they can destroy the baby’s red bloodcells,
 causing severe or fatal anemia.
 The first step in preventing HDN is to find out
 the Rh types of the expectant parents.If the mother is
 Rh-negative and the father is Rh-positive,the baby is
 at risk for developing HDN.The next step is to test the
 mother’s serum to make sure she doesn’t already have
 anti-Dantibodies from a previous pregnancy or trans
fusion. This procedure is similar to blood typing.
 Finally, the Rh-negativemother is given an injection
 of Rh Immunoglobulin(RhIg)at 28 weeks of gesta
tion and again after delivery,if the baby is Rh positive.  The RhIg attaches to any Rh-positive cells from the
 baby in the mother’s bloodstream, preventing them
 from triggering anti-D antibody production in the
 mother. An Rh-negative woman should also receive
 RhIg following a miscarriage, abortion, or ectopic
 pregnancy.
 OTHER BLOOD GROUP SYSTEMS. Several other
 blood group systems may be involved in HDN and
 transfusion reactions, although they are much less
 frequent than ABO and Rh. They are the Duffy,
 Kell, Kidd, MNS, and P systems. Tests for antigens
 from these systems are not included in routine blood
 typing, but they are commonly used in paternity
 testing.
 Like Rh antibodies, antibodies in these systems
 do not develop naturally, but as an immune response
 after transfusion or during pregnancy. An antibody
 screening test is done before a crossmatch to check
 for unexpected antibodies to antigens in these sys
tems. A person’s serum is mixed in a test tube with
 commercially-prepared cells containing antigens
 from these systems. If clumping occurs, the antibody
 is identified.
 Crossmatching
 Crossmatching is the final step in pretransfusion
 testing. It is commonly referred to as compatibility
 testing, or ‘‘Type and Cross.’’
 Before blood from a donorandtherecipient are
 crossmatched, both are ABOandRhtyped.Inaddi
tion, antibody screening is done to look for antibo
dies to certain Rh, Duffy, MNS, Kell, Kidd, and
 P system antigens. If an antibody to one of these
 antigens is found, only blood without that antigen
 will be compatible in a crossmatch. This sequence
 must be repeated before each transfusion a person
 receives.
 Tobeginthecrossmatch, bloodfromadonorwith
 the same ABO and Rh type as the rcipient is selected.
 In atest tube, serum from thepatient is mixedwithred
 blood cells from the donor. If clumping occurs, the
 blood is not compatible; if clumping does not occur,
 the blood is compatible. If an unexpected antibody is
 found in either the patient or the donor, the blood
 bank does further testing to make sure the blood is
 compatible.
 In an emergency, when there is not enough time
 for blood typing and crossmatching, O red blood cells
 may begiven, preferably Rh-negative. O blood type is
 called the universal donor because it has no ABO
 antigens for a patient’s antibodies to attack. In con
trast, AB blood type is called the universal recipient
 because it has no ABO antibodies to attack the anti
gens on transfused red blood cells. If there is time
 for blood typing, red blood cells of the recipient type
 (type specific cells) are given. In either case, the cross
match is continued, even though the transfusion has
 begun.
 Preparation
 To collect the 10 mL blood needed for these tests,
 a healthcare worker ties a tourniquet above the
 patient’s elbow, locates a vein in the inner elbow
 region, and inserts a needle into that vein. Vacuum  action draws the blood through the needle into an
 attached tube. Collection of the sample takes only a
 few minutes.
 Blood typing and crossmatching must be done
 three days or less before a transfusion. A person
 doesn’t need to change diet, medications, or activities
 before these tests. He should tell his healthcare provi
der if, during the last three months, he has received a
 blood transfusion or a plasma substitute, or has had a
 radiology procedure using intravenous contrast
 media. These can give false clumping reactions in
 both typing and crossmatching tests.
 Aftercare
 The possible side effects of any blood collection
 are discomfort or bruising at the site where the
 needle punctured the skin, as well as dizziness or faint
ing. Bruising is reduced if pressure is applied with a
 finger to the puncture site until the bleeding stops.
 Discomfort is treated with warm packs to the
 puncture site.
 Risks
 There are no risks from the blood collection or
 test procedures. Blood transfusions always have the
 risk of an unexpected transfusion reaction. A nurse
 watches a patient for signs of a reaction during the
 entire transfusion.
 Normal results
 There is no normal blood type. The desired result
 of a crossmatch is that compatible donor blood is
 found. Compatibility testing procedures are designed
 to provide the safest blood product possible for the
 recipient, but a compatible crossmatch is no guarantee
 that an unexpected adverse reaction will not appear
 during the transfusion.
 Abnormal results
 Except in an emergency, a person cannotreceive a
 transfusion without a compatible crossmatch result.