 Definition
 Blood gas analysis, also called arterial blood gas
 (ABG) analysis, is a test which measures the amounts
 of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the blood, as well as
 the acidity (pH) of the blood.
 Purpose
 An ABG analysis evaluates how effectively the
 lungs are delivering oxygen to the blood and how
 efficiently they are eliminating carbon dioxide from
 it. The test also indicates how well the lungs and
 kidneys are interacting to maintain normal blood pH
 (acid-base balance). Blood gas studies are usually
 donetoassessrespiratory disease andother conditions
 that may affect the lungs, and to manage patients
 receiving oxygen therapy (respiratory therapy). In
 addition, the acid-base component of the test provides
 information on kidney function.
 Description
 Blood gas analysis is performed on blood from an
 artery. It measures the partial pressures of oxygen and
 carbon dioxide in the blood, as well as oxygen content,
 oxygensaturation, bicarbonate content, and blood pH.
 Oxygeninthelungsiscarriedtothetissuesthrough
 the bloodstream, but only a small amount of this oxy
gen can actually dissolve in arterial blood. How much
 dissolves depends on the partial pressure of the oxygen
 (the pressure that the gas exerts on the walls of the
 arteries). Therefore, testing the partial pressure of oxy
gen is actually measuring how much oxygen the lungs
 are delivering to the blood. Carbon dioxide is released
 into the blood as a by-product of cell metabolism. The
 partial carbon dioxide pressure indicates how well the
 lungs are eliminating this carbon dioxide.
 The remainder of oxygen that is not dissolved in
 the blood combines with hemoglobin, a protein–iron
 compound found in the red blood cells. The oxygen
 content measurement in an ABG analysis indicates
 how much oxygen is combined with the hemoglobin.
 A related value is the oxygen saturation, which com
pares the amount of oxygen actually combined with
 hemoglobin to the total amount of oxygen that the
 hemoglobin is capable of combining with.
 Carbondioxide dissolves more readily in the blood
 than oxygen does, primarily forming bicarbonate and
 smaller amounts of carbonic acid. When present in normal amounts, the ratio of carbonic acid to bicar
bonate creates an acid-base balance in the blood, help
ing to keep the pH at a level where the body’s cellular
 functions are most efficient. The lungs and kidneys both participate in maintaining the carbonic acid
bicarbonate balance. The lungs control the carbonic
 acid level and the kidneys regulate the bicarbonate. If
 either organ is not functioning properly, an acid-base
 imbalance can result. Determination of bicarbonate
 and pH levels, then, aids in diagnosing the cause of
 abnormal blood gas values.
 The procedure
 Thebloodsample is obtained by arterial puncture
 (usually in the wrist, although it could be in the groin
 or arm) or from an arterial line already in place. If a
 puncture is needed, the skin over the artery is cleaned
 with anantiseptic. A technician then collects the blood
 with a small sterile needle attached to a disposable
 syringe. The patient may feel a brief throbbing or
 cramping at the site of the puncture. After the blood
 is drawn, the sample must be transported to the
 laboratory as soon as possible for analysis.
 Preparation
 Thereare nospecial preparations. Patients have no
 restrictions on drinking or eating before the test. If the
 patient is receiving oxygen, the oxygen concentration
 must remain the same for 20 minutes before the test; if
 the test is to be taken without oxygen, the gas must be
 turned off for 20 minutes before the test is taken. The
 patient should breathe normally during the test.
 Aftercare
 After the blood has been taken, the technician
 or the patient applies pressure to the puncture site
 for 10–15minutestostopthebleeding,andthenplaces
 a dressing over the puncture.The patient should rest
 quietly while applying the pressure to the puncture
 site. Health care workers will observe the patient for
 signs of bleeding or circulation problems
 Risks
 Risks are very low when the test is done correctly.
 Risks include bleeding orbruising atthe site, ordelayed
 bleeding from the site. Very rarely, there may be a
 problem with circulation in the puncture area.
 Normal results
 Normal blood gas values are as follows:
 partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2): 75–100 mm Hg
 partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PaCO2): 35–45
 mmHg
 oxygen content (O2CT): 15–23%
 oxygen saturation (SaO2): 94–100%
 bicarbonate (HCO3): 22–26 mEq/liter
 pH: 7.35–7.45
 Abnormal results
 Values that differ from those listed above may
 indicate respiratory, metabolic, or kidney disease.
 These results also may be abnormal if the patient
 has experienced trauma that may affect breathing
 (especially head and neck injuries). Disorders, such
 as anemia, that affect the oxygen-carrying capacity
 of blood, can produce an abnormally low oxygen
 content value. 