Definition
 Ablood culture is done when a person has symp
toms of a blood infection, also called bacteremia.
 Blood is drawn from the person one or more times
 and is tested in a laboratory to find and identify any
 microorganism present and growing in the blood. If a
 microorganism is found, more testing is done to deter
minethe antibiotics that will be effective in treating the
 infection.
 Purpose
 Bacteremia is a serious clinical condition and can
 lead to death. To give the best chance for effective
 treatment and survival, a blood culture is done as
 soon as an infection is suspected.
 Symptoms of bacteremia are fever, chills, mental
 confusion, anxiety, rapid heart beat, hyperventilation,
 blood clotting problems, and shock. These symptoms
 are especially significant in a person who already has
 another illness or infection, is hospitalized, or has
 trouble fighting infections because of a weak immune
 system. Often, the blood infection results from an
 infection somewhere else in the body that has now
 spread.
 Additionally, blood cultures are done to find the
 causes of other infections. These include bacterial
 pneumonia (an infection of the lung), and infectious
 endocarditis (an infection of the inner layer of the
 heart). Both of these infections leak bacteria into the
 blood.
 After a blood infection has been diagnosed, con
firmed by culture, and treated, an additional blood culture may be done to make sure the infection is
 gone.
 Description
 Culture strategies
 There are many variables involved in performing
 a blood culture. Before the person’s blood is drawn,
 the physician must make several decisions based on a
 knowledge of infections and the person’s clinical con
dition and medical history.
 Several groups of microorganisms, including
 bacteria, viruses, mold, and yeast, can cause blood
 infections. The bacteria group can be further broken
 down into aerobes and anaerobes. Most aerobes do
 not need oxygen to live. They can grow with oxygen
 (aerobic microbes) or without oxygen (anaerobic
 microbes).
 Based on the clinical condition of the patient, the
 physician determines what group of microorganisms
 is likely to be causing the infection and then orders
 one or more specific types of blood culture, including
 aerobic, anaerobic, viral, or fungal (for yeasts and
 molds). Each specific type of culture is handled differ
ently by the laboratory. Most blood cultures test for
 both aerobic and anaerobic microbes. Fungal, viral,
 and mycobacterial blood cultures can also be done,
 but are less common.
 Thephysician must also decide how many blood
 cultures should be done. One culture is rarely
 enough, but two to three are usually adequate.
 Four cultures are occasionally required. Some fac
tors influencing this decision are the specific micro
organisms the physician expects to find based on the
 person’s symptoms or previous culture results, and  whether or not the person has had recent antibiotic
 therapy.
 Thetime at whichthe cultures are to be drawn is
 another decision made by the physician. During
 most blood infections (called intermittent bactere
mia) microorganisms enter the blood at various
 time intervals. Blood drawn randomly may miss the
 microorganisms. Since microorganisms enter the
 blood 30–90 minutes before the person’s fever
 spikes, collecting the culture just after the fever
 spike offers the best likelihood of finding the micro
organism. The second and third cultures may be
 collected at the same time, but from different places
 on the person, or spaced at 30-minute or one-hour
 intervals, as the physician chooses. During continu
ous bacteremia, such as infective endocarditis,
 microorganisms are always in the blood and the
 timing of culture collection is less important. Blood
 cultures should always be collected before antibiotic
 treatment has begun.
 Laboratory analysis
 Bacteria are the most common microorganisms
 found in blood infections. Laboratory analysis of a
 bacterial blood culture differs slightly from that of a
 fungal culture and significantly from that of a viral
 culture.
 Blood is drawn from a person and put directly
 into a blood culture bottle containing a nutritional
 broth. After the laboratory receives the blood culture
 bottle, several processes must be completed:
 provide an environment for the bacteria to grow
 detect the growth when it occurs
 identify the bacteria that grow
 test the bacteria against certain antibiotics to deter
mine which antibiotic will be effective
 There are several types of systems, both manual
 and automated, available to laboratories to carry out
 these processes.
 The broth in the blood culture bottle is the first
 step in creating an environment in which bacteria will
 grow. It contains all the nutrients that bacteria need to
 grow. If the physician expects anaerobic bacteria to
 grow, oxygen will be kept out of the blood culture
 bottle; if aerobes are expected, oxygen will be allowed
 in the bottle.
 The bottles are placed in an incubator and kept at
 body temperature. They are watched daily for signs of
 growth, including cloudiness or a color change in the
 broth, gas bubbles, or clumps of bacteria. When there
 is evidence of growth, the laboratory does a gramstain
 and a subculture. To do the gram stain, a drop of
 blood is removed from the bottle and placed on a
 microscope slide. The blood is allowed to dry and
 then is stained with purple and red stains and exam
ined under the microscope. If bacteria are seen, the
 color of stain they picked up (purple or red), their
 shape (such as round or rectangular), and their size
 provide valuable clues as to what type of microorgan
ism they are and what antibiotics might work best. To
 do the subculture, a drop of blood is placed on a
 culture plate, spread over the surface, and placed in
 an incubator.
 If there is no immediate visible evidence of growth
 in the bottles, the laboratory looks for bacteria by
 doing gram stains and subcultures. These steps are
 repeated daily for the first several days and periodi
cally after that.
 When bacteria grows, the laboratory identifies it
 using biochemical tests and the gram stain. Sensitivity
 testing, also called antibiotic susceptibility testing, is
 also done. The bacteria are tested against many differ
ent antibiotics to see which antibiotics can effectively
 kill it.
 All information is passed on to the physician as
 soon as it is known. An early report, known as a
 preliminary report, is usually available after one day.
 This report will tell if any bacteria have been found
 yet, and if so, the results of the gram stain. The next
 preliminary report may include a description of the
 bacteria growing on the subculture. The laboratory
 notifies the physician immediately when an organism
 is found and as soon as sensitivity tests are complete.
 Sensitivity tests may be complete before the bacteria
 is completely identified. The final report may not be
 available for five to seven days. If bacteria was
 found, the report will include its complete identifica
tion andalist of the antibiotics to which the bacteria is
 sensitive.
 One automated system is considered one of
 the most important recent technical advances in
 blood cultures. It is called continuous-monitoring
 blood culture systems (CMCCS). The instruments
 automatically monitor the bottles containing the
 patient blood for evidence of microorganisms, usually
 every 10 minutes. Many datapoints are collected daily
 for each bottle, and fed into a computer for analysis.
 Sophisticated mathematical calculations can deter
mine when microorganisms have grown. This, com
bined with more frequent blood tests, make it possible  to detect microbial growth earlier. In addition, all
 CMBCSinstruments have the detection system, incu
bator, and agitation unit in one unit.
 Preparation
 Ten ml (milliliter) of blood is usually needed for
 each blood culture bottle. First a healthcare worker
 locates a vein in the inner elbow region. The area of
 skin where the blood will be drawn must be disin
fected to prevent any microorganisms on a person’s
 skin from entering the blood culture bottle and con
taminating it. The area is disinfected by wiping the
 area with alcohol in a circular fashion, starting with
 tiny circles at the spot where the needle will puncture
 the skin and enlarging the size of the circles while
 wiping away from the puncture site. The same
 pattern of wiping is repeated using an iodine or iodo
phor solution. The top of the bottle is disinfected
 using alcohol. After the person’s skin has been
 disinfected, the healthcare worker draws the blood
 and about 10 ml of blood is injected into each
 blood culture bottle. The type of bottles used will
 vary based on whether the physician is looking
 for bacteria (aerobes or anaerobes), yeast, mold, or
 viruses.
 Aftercare
 Discomfort or bruising may occur at the puncture
 site or the person may feel dizzy or faint. Pressure to
 the puncturesite until the bleeding stopsreducesbruis
ing. Warm packs relieve discomfort.
 Normal results
 Normalresults will be negative. A single negative
 culture does not rule out a blood infection. False
 negatives can occur if the person was started on
 antibiotics before the blood was drawn, if the
 environment for growth was not right, the timing
 was off, or for some unknown reason the micro
organism just didn’t grow. Three negative cultures
 may be enough to rule out bacteremia in the case of
 endocarditis.
 Abnormal results
 The physician’s skill in interpreting the culture
 results and assessing the person’s clinical condition is
 essential in distinguishing a blood culture that is posi
tive because of a true infection from a culture that is
 positive because it became contaminated. In true
 bacteremia, the patient’s clinical condition should be
 consistent with a blood infection caused by the micro
organism that was found. The microorganism is
 usually found in more than one culture, it usually
 grows soon after the bottles are incubated, and it is
 often the cause of an infection somewhere else in the
 person’s body.
 When the culture is positive because of contam
ination, the patient’s clinical condition usually is not
 consistent with an infection from the identified
 microorganism. In addition, the microorganism is
 often one commonly found on skin, it rarely causes
 infection, it is found in only one bottle, and it may
 appear after several days of incubation. More than
 one microorganism often grow in contaminated
 cultures. 