Definition
 A blood clot is a thickened mass in the blood
 formed by tiny substances called platelets. Clots form
 to stop bleeding, such as at the site of cut. But clots should not form when blood is moving through the
 body; when clots form inside blood vessels or when
 blood has a tendency to clot too much, serious health
 problems can occur.
 Description
 Assoonas abloodvessel wall is damaged—by a
 cut or similar trauma—aseries of reactions normally
 takes place to activate platelets to stop the bleeding.
 Platelets are the tiny particles in the blood released
 into the bone marrow that gather together and form
 a barrier to further bleeding. Several proteins in the
 body are involved in the platelets clotting process.
 Chief among these proteins are collagen, thrombin,
 and von Willebrand factor. Collagen and thrombin
 help platelets stick together. As platelets gather at
 the site of injury, they change in shape from round
 to spiny, releasing proteins and other substances
 that help catch more platelets and clotting proteins.
 This enlarges the plug that becomes a blood
 clot. Formation of blood clots also is called
 ‘‘coagulation’’.
 The series of reactions that cause proteins and
 platelets to create blood clots also are balanced by
 other reactions that stop the clotting process and dis
solve clots after the blood vessel has healed. If this
 control system fails, minor blood vessel injuries can
 trigger clotting throughout the body. The tendency to
 clot too much is called ‘‘hypercoagulation’’. Anytime
 clots form inside blood vessels, they can lead to serious
 complications.
 The formation of a clot in a blood vessels may be
 called thrombophlebitis. The term refers to swelling of
 one or more veins caused by a blood clot. Although
 some clots occur in the arms or small, surface blood
 vessels, most occur in the lower legs. When the blood
 clot occurs in a deep vein, it is called deep vein throm
bosis, or DVT. As many as one of every 1,000
 Americans develops DVT each year. The danger of
 DVTcomeswhenpieces of the clot, known as emboli,
 break off and travel through the bloodstream to an
 artery.
 Abloodclot that blocks an artery to the brain can
 cause a stroke. If the clot blocks blood flow to the
 lungs pulmonary embolism can occur. A blood clot
 that blocks a coronary artery can cause a heart attack.
 Certain people are at higher risk for blood clots than
 others; surgery, some injuries, childbirth and lying or
 sitting still for extended periods of time put people at
 higher risk, as do inherited disorders. Once a person
 has a blood clot, he or she may have to take blood
thinning drugs to prevent clots from recurring. Men  andwomenareatsimilarrisk for bloodclots. A recent
 study in Austria found that men run a higher risk of
 recurring blood clots than women, though the reason
 is unknown.
 Causes and symptoms
 Many causes can lead to blood clots, some
 genetic and some environmental. An environmental
 cause of DVT is prolonged inactivity. For instance,
 having to sit in a car or airplane for a long period of
 time decreases blood flow in the lower legs. Recent
 studies have shown that 1% of air travelers develop
 blood clots, usually on long flights of five hours or
 more. However, one study in 2004 found that air
 travelers developed clots on flightsasshortasthree
 hours, though they often dissolved naturally and did
 not lead to complications. Other environmental
 causes of blood clots include use of hormone replace
ment therapy to ease menopausal symptoms, oral
 contraceptives for birth control, pregnancy (and a
 childbirth within the past six weeks), recent surgery
 or procedures involving use of a central venous
 access catheter, and cancer. Smoking also is an
 important and preventable environmental risk for
 blood clots.
 Somepeople are born with a higher risk for blood
 clots. Hypercoagulation disorders are genetic condi
tions. Usually the body doesn t produce enough of
 the proteins involved in the clotting process, so they
 cannot do their job to stop the clotting; in other cases,
 they have an extra protein that causes too much
 clotting. There may be no symptoms of blood clots until
 they grow so large that they block the flow of blood
 through the vein. Then, symptoms may develop sud
denly around the area and include:
 Pain or tenderness in the affected area.
 Warmth or redness of the skin in the affected area.
 Sudden swelling in the affected limb.
 Additional symptoms may indicate serious com
plications of blood clots such as pulmonary embolism,
 stroke, and heart attack. If vein swelling or pain are
 accompanied by high fever or shortness of breath,
 rapid pulse, or chest pain, or other symptoms that
 may indicate stroke, heart attack, or pulmonary
 embolism, it is advised to go to an emergency room
 immediately.
 Diagnosis
 A physician will diagnose blood clots based on
 patient history and one of several diagnostic imaging
 exams. The patient’s history will help determine pos
sible risk factors that may lead to suspected blood
 clots. In addition to family history or known genetic
 disorders, the patient may mention an environmental
 factor such as recent air travel or use of high-risk
 mediations.
 To help get a picture of suspected clots inside the
 veins, the first test chosen normally is an ultrasound.
 Doppler or duplex ultrasound uses sound waves that
 travel through tissue and reflect back. A computer
 transforms the sound waves into moving images on
 the screen that mayshowtheclot,aswellasbloodflow
 near the clot and any abnormalities. Ultrasound does
 not use xraysandisanoninvasivemethod. Computed
 tomography (CT) scans also might be used to image
 the blood vessels. It is similar to x rays, except the
 images are much like cross-section slices with greater
 detail that can be computerizedandevenviewedthree
dimensionally. A special dye called a contrast agent
 may be injected before the exam to help highlight the
 veins. Magnetic resonance angiography uses magnetic
 resonance imaging (MRI) to image the blood vessels.
 It also may involve injection of a contrast dye.
 Venographyisless commonlyused,butinvolvesinject
ing a contrast and using x rays to image the vein.
 Treatment
 Medicines can help thin blood, making it less
 likely to clot. The two most common blood thin
ners are heparin and warfarin. Heparin works
 right away, keeping blood clots from growing. It
 usually is injected. In recent years, more physi
cians have been prescribing low-molecular weight
 heparin, purified versions of the drug that can be
 given with less monitoring. Warfarin (coumadin)
 often is used for long-term treatment of blood
 clots and is taken orally. Patients must work clo
sely with their physicians to constantly monitor its
 effects and adjust dose if necessary. Too little
 warfarin can lead to clotting, but toomuch can
 thin the blood so much that causing life-threaten
ing bleeding can occur. The same can be true of
 low-molecular weight heparin when used on a
 long-term, at-home basis.
 Other treatments for blood clots include injecting
 clot busting drugs directly into the clot through a
 catheter, or in rare instances, installation of a filter to
 block a clot from lodging in the lungs. Sometimes,
 surgery also is needed to remove a clot blocking a
 pelvic or abdominal vein or one that is chronic and
 disabling. A cardiovascular surgeon or interventional
 radiologist may perform balloon angioplasty or insert
 a stent to open a narrowed or damaged vein. In an
 emergency situation, a drug called tissue plasminogen
 activator, or tPA, may be given to immediately dis
solve alife-threatening blood clot to the brain or heart.
 In 2004, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
 approved a new, small, corklike device that can be
 used to remove blood clots from the brains of patients
 who cannot receive clot-busting drugs.
 Alternative treatment
 Garlic is thought to lower blood clotting poten
tial. Less evidence suggests onions andcayennepepper
 may help keep blood thin. New research from
 Australia adds tomato juice to the list of potential
 blood thinners. Subjects who drank a glass of tomato
 juice a day reduced their risk for DVT, stroke and
 cardiovascular disease. Research has shown that a
 natural soy and pine product called pinokinase has
 been effective in controlling DVT in air travelers.
 Patients seeking alternative treatments for blood
 clots should work with certified practitioners and
 should inform their allopathic provider about their
 alternative care.
 Prognosis
 If detected and controlled with medications,
 blood clots can be safely managed. However, if the
 clots become dislodged and travel to an artery, they
 can cause nearly instant death. For instance, more
 than 600,000 people have a pulmonary embolism
 each year and more than 10% of them die from the embolism, most of them within 30 to 60 minutes after
 symptoms start.
 Prevention
 Clots may be avoided by not smoking, and by not
 using medications that add to the risk. Clotting can be
 prevented by following physician recommendations
 concerning medications. Sometimes, physicians will
 prescribe special support stockings that prevent swel
ling and reduce chances of DVT. When taking an air
 flight of six hours or longer, drinking plenty of fluids
 to avoid dehydration, avoiding tight clothing around
 the waist, and stretching calves every hour can help
 prevent DVT. It is advised that those on long flights
 get up and move aboutonceanhour during the flight.
 If not possible, moving the legs regularly while seated
 by flexing the ankles, then pressing the feet against the
 seat in the row ahead or on the floor can help stretch
 the calves. Aphysician mayadvisethoseathighriskof
 DVTwear support stockings during the flight or take
 low-molecular weight heparin two to four hours
 before departure.