Definition
 Body dysmorphic disorder (BDD) is defined by
 DSM-IV-TR as a condition marked by excessive pre
occupation with an imaginary or minor defect in a
 facial feature or localized part of the body. The diag
nostic criteria specify that the condition must be suffi
ciently severe to cause a decline in the patient’s social,
 occupational, or educational functioning. The most
 common cause of this decline is the time lost
 in obsessing about the ‘‘defect’’—one study found
 that 68 percent of patients in a sample of adolescents
 diagnosed with BDD spent three or more hours every
 day thinking about the body part or facial feature of
 concern. DSM-IV assigns BDD to the larger category
 of somatoform disorders, which are disorders charac
terized by physical complaints that appear to be
 medical in origin but that cannot be explained in
 terms of a physical disease, the results of substance
 abuse, or by another mental disorder.
 The earliest known case of BDD in the medical
 literature was reported by an Italian physician named
 Enrique Morselli in 1886, but the disorder was not
 defined as a formal diagnostic category until DSM
III-R in 1987. The World Health Organization
 (WHO) did not add BDD to the International
 Classification of Diseases (ICD) until 1992. The
 word dysmorphic comes from two Greek words that
 mean ‘‘bad’’ or ‘‘ugly’’ and ‘‘shape’’ or ‘‘form.’’ BDD
 was previously known as dysmorphophobia.
 Description
 BDD is characterized by an unusual degree of
 worry or concern about a specific part of the face or
 body,rather thanthegeneralsize orshapeofthebody.
 It is distinguished from anorexia nervosa and bulimia
 nervosa in that patients with eating disorders are
 preoccupied with their overall weight and body
 shape. As many as 50 percent of patients diagnosed
 with BDD undergo plastic surgery to correct their
 perceived physical defects.
 Since the publication of DSM-IV in 1994, some
 psychiatrists have suggested that there is a subtype of
 BDD, namely muscle dysmorphia. Muscle dysmor
phia is marked by excessive concern with one’s mus
cularity and/or fitness. Persons with muscle
 dysmorphia spend unusual amounts of time working
 out in gyms or exercising rather than dieting obses
sively or seeking plastic surgery. DSM-IV-TR added
 references to concern about body build and excessive  weight lifting to DSM-IV’s description of BDD in
 order to cover muscle dysmorphia.
 BDD and muscle dysmorphia can both be
 described as disorders resulting from the patient’s
 distorted body image. Body image refers to a per
son’s mental picture of his or her outward appear
ance, including size, shape, and form. It has two
 major components: how the person perceives their
 physical appearance, and how they feel about their
 body. Significant distortions in self-perception can
 lead to intense dissatisfaction with one’s body and
 dysfunctional behaviors aimed at improving one’s
 appearance. Some patients with BDD are aware
 that their concerns are excessive, but others do
 not have this degree of insight; about 50 percent
 of patients diagnosed with BDD also meet the
 criteria for a delusional disorder.
 TheusualageofonsetofBDDislatechildhoodor
 early adolescence; the average age of patients diag
nosed with the disorder is 17. BDD has a high rate of
 comorbidity, which means that people diagnosed with
 the disorder are highly likely to have been diagnosed
 with another psychiatric disorder—most commonly
 major depression, social phobia, or obsessive-compul
sive disorder (OCD). About 29% of patients with
 BDDeventually try to commit suicide.
 BDDis thought to affect 1–2 percent of the gen
eral population in the United States and Canada,
 although some doctors think that it is underdiagnosed
 because it coexists so often with depression and other
 disorders. In addition, patients are often ashamed of
 grooming rituals and other behaviors associated with
 BDD,and mayavoid telling their doctor about them.
 BDD is thought to affect men and women equally;
 however, there are no reliable data as of the early
 2000s regarding racial or ethnic differences in the inci
dence of the disorder.
 Causes and symptoms
 Causes
 Thecauses of BDDfallinto twomajor categories,
 neurobiological and psychosocial.
 NEUROBIOLOGICAL CAUSES. Research indicates
 that patients diagnosed with BDD have serotonin
 levels that are lower than normal. Serotonin is a neu
rotransmitter— a chemical produced by the brain that
 helps to transmit nerve impulses across the junctions
 between nerve cells. Low serotonin levels are asso
ciated with depression and other mood disorders.
 PSYCHOSOCIAL CAUSES. Another important fac
tor in the development of BDD is the influence of the
 mass media in developed countries, particularly the
 role of advertising in spreading images of physically
 ‘‘perfect’’ men and women. Impressionable children
 and adolescents absorb the message that anything
 short of physical perfection is unacceptable. They
 may then develop distorted perceptions of their own
 faces and bodies.
 Ayoungperson’sfamilyoforiginalsohasapower
ful influence on his or her vulnerability to BDD.
 Children whose parents are themselves obsessed with
 appearance, dieting, and/or body building, or who are  highly critical of their children’s looks, are at greater
 risk of developing BDD.
 An additional factor in some young people is a
 history of childhood trauma or abuse. Buried feelings
 about the abuse or traumatic incident may emerge
 in the form of obsession about a part of the face or
 body.This‘‘reassignment’’ ofemotionsfromtheunac
knowledged true cause to another issue is called dis
placement.Forexample,anadolescentwhofrequently
 felt overwhelmed in childhood by physically abusive
 parents may develop a preoccupation at the high
 school level with muscular strength and power.
 Symptoms
 Thecentral symptomofBDDisexcessiveconcern
 with a specific facial feature or body part. Research
 indicates that the features most likely to be thefocusof
 the patient’s attention are (in order of frequency) com
plexion flaws (acne, blemishes, scars, wrinkles); hair
 (on the head or the body, too much or too little); and
 facial features (size, shape, or lack of symmetry). The
 patient’s concerns may, however, involve other body
 parts, and may shift over time from one feature to
 another.
 Other symptoms of body dysmorphic disorder
 include:
 Ritualistic behavior. Ritualistic behavior refers to
 actions that the patient performs to manage anxiety
 andthattakeupexcessiveamountsofhisorhertime.
 Patients are typically upset if someone or something
 interferes with or interrupts their ritual. Ritualistic
 behaviors in BDD may include exercise or makeup
 routines, assuming specific poses or postures in front
 of a mirror, etc.
 Camouflaging the ‘‘problem’’ feature or body part
 with makeup, hats, or clothing. Camouflaging
 appears to be the single most common symptom
 among patients with BDD; it is reported by 94%.
 Abnormal behavior around mirrors, car bumpers,
 large windows, or similar reflecting surfaces. A
 majority of patients diagnosed with BDD frequently
 check their appearance in mirrors or spend long
 periods of time doing so. A minority, however,
 react in the opposite fashion and avoid mirrors
 whenever possible.
 Frequent requests for reassurance from others about
 their appearance.
 Frequently comparing one’s appearance to others.
 Avoiding activities outside the home, including
 school and social events.
 The diagnosis of BDD in children or adolescents
 is often made by physicians in family practice because
 they are more likely to have developed long-term rela
tionships of trust with young people. At the adult
 level, it is often specialists in dermatology, cosmetic
 dentistry, or plastic surgery who may suspect that the
 patient suffers from BDDbecauseoffrequentrequests
 for repeated or unnecessary procedures. Reported
 rates of BDD among dermatology and cosmetic sur
gery patients range between 6 and 15 percent. The
 diagnosis is made on the basis of the patient’s history
 together with the physician’s observations of the
 patient’s overall mood and conversation patterns.
 People with BDD often come across to others as gen
erally anxious and worried. In addition, the patient’s
 dress or clothing styles may suggest a diagnosis of
 BDD. It is not unusual, however, for patients with
 BDD to take offense if their primary care doctor
 suggests referral to a psychiatrist.
 Some physicians may use a self-report question
naire, such as the Multidimensional Body-Self
 Relations Questionnaire (MBSRQ) or the short form
 of the Situational Inventory of Body-Image Dysphoria
 (SIBID), to evaluate patients during an office visit.
 There are no brain imaging studies or laboratory
 tests as of the early 2000s that can be used to diagnose
 BDD.
 Treatment
 The standard course of treatment for body dys
morphic disorder is a combination of medications and
 psychotherapy. Surgical, dental, or dermatologic
 treatments have been found to be ineffective.
 The medications most frequently prescribed for
 patients with BDD are the selective serotonin reuptake
 inhibitors, most commonly fluoxetine (Prozac) or ser
traline (Zoloft). Other SSRIs that have been used with
 this group of patients include fluvoxamine (Luvox)
 and paroxetine (Paxil). In fact, it is the relatively high
 rate of positive responses to SSRIs among BDD
 patients that led to the hypothesis that the disorder
 has a neurobiological component related to serotonin
 levels in the body. An associated finding is that
 patients with BDD require higher dosages of SSRI
 medications than patients who are being treated for
 depression with these drugs.
 The most effective approach to psychotherapy
 with BDD patients is cognitive-behavioral restructur
ing. Sincethedisorderisrelatedtodelusionsaboutone’s
 appearance, cognitive-oriented therapy that challenges  inaccurate self-perceptions is more effective than purely
 supportive approaches. Thought-stopping and relaxa
tion techniques also work well with BDD patients
 when they are combined with cognitive restructuring.
 Some doctors recommend couples therapy or
 family therapy in order to involve the patients parents,
 spouse, or partner in his or her treatment. This
 approach may be particularly helpful if family mem
bers are critical of the patient s looks or are reinforcing
 his or her unrealistic body image.
 Alternative treatment
 Although no alternative or complementary
 form of treatment has been recommended specifi
cally for BDD, such herbal remedies for depression
 as St. John’s wort have been reported as helping some
 BDD patients. Aromatherapy appears to be a useful
 aid to relaxation techniques as well as a pleasurable
 physical experience for BDD patients. Yoga has
 helped some persons with BDD acquire more realistic
 perceptions of their bodies and to replace obsessions
 about external appearance with new respect for their
 body’s inner structure and functioning.
 Prognosis
 As of early 2005, the prognosis of BDD is consid
ered good for patients receiving appropriate treat
ment. On the other hand, researchers do not know
 enough about the lifetime course of body dysmorphic
 disorder to offer detailed statistics. DSM-IV-TR notes
 that the disorder ‘‘has a fairly continuous course, with
 few symptom-free intervals, although the intensity of
 symptoms may wax and wane over time.’’
 Prevention
 Giventhepervasiveinfluence of themass mediain
 contemporary Western societies, the best preventive
 strategy involves challenging their unrealistic images
 of attractive people. Parents, teachers, primary health
 care professionals, and other adults who work with
 young people can point out and discuss the pitfalls of
 trying to look ‘‘perfect.’’ In addition, parents or other
 adults can educate themselves about BDD and its
 symptoms, and pay attention to any warning signs in
 their children’s dress or behavior.