Definition
 The bone marrow—the sponge-like tissue found
 in the center of certain bones—contains stem cells that
 are the precursors of white blood cells, red blood cells,
 and platelets. These blood cells are vital for normal
 body functions, such as oxygen transport, defense
 against infection and disease, and clotting. Blood
 cells have a limited lifespan and are constantly being
 replaced; therefore, healthy stem cells are vital.
 In association with certain diseases, stem cells
 mayproduce too many, too few, or otherwise abnor
mal blood cells. Also, medical treatments may
 destroy stem cells or alter blood cell production.
 The resultant blood cell abnormalities can be life
 threatening.
 Bone marrow transplantation involves extracting
 bone marrow containing normal stem cells from a
 healthy donor, and transferring it to a recipient
 whose body cannot manufacture proper quantities of
 normal blood cells. The goal of the transplant is to
 rebuild the recipient’s blood cells and immune system
 and hopefully cure the underlying ailment. 
 Purpose
 Aperson’s red blood cells, white blood cells, and
 platelets may be destroyed or may be abnormal due to
 disease. Also, certain medical therapies, particularly
 chemotherapy or radiation treatment, may destroy a
 person’s stem cells. The consequence to a person’s
 health is severe. Under normal circumstances, red
 blood cells carry oxygen throughout the body and
 remove carbon dioxide from the body’s tissues.
 White blood cells form the cornerstone of the body’s
 immune system and defend it against infection.
 Platelets limit bleeding by enabling the blood to clot
 if a blood vessel is damaged.
 A bone marrow transplant is used to rebuild the
 body’s capacity to produce these blood cells and bring
 their numbers to normal levels. Illnesses that may be
 treated with a bone marrow transplant include both
 cancerous and noncancerous diseases.
 Cancerous diseases may or may not specifically
 involve blood cells; but, cancer treatment can destroy
 the body’s ability to manufacture newbloodcells.Bone
 marrow transplantation may be used in conjunction
 with additional treatments, such as chemotherapy, for various types of leukemia, Hodgkin’s disease, lym
phoma, breast and ovarian cancer,andothercancers.
 Noncancerous diseases for which bone marrow trans
plantation can be a treatment option include aplastic
 anemia, sickle cell anemia, thalassemia, and severe
 immunodeficiency.
 Precautions
 Bone marrow transplants are not for everyone.
 Transplants are accompanied by a risk of infection,
 transplant rejection by the recipient’s immune system,
 and other complications. The procedure has a lower
 success rate the greater the recipient’s age. Comp
lications are exacerbated for people whose health is
 already seriously impaired as in late-stage cancers.
 Therefore, a person’s age or state of health may
 prohibit use of a bone marrow transplant. The typical
 cut-off age for a transplant ranges from 40 to 55 years;
 however, a person’s general health is usually the more
 important factor.
 Even in the absence of complications, the trans
plant and associated treatments are hard on the
 recipient. Bone marrow transplants are debilitating. A
 person’s ability to withstand the rigorsofthe transplant
 is a key consideration in deciding to use this treatment.
 Description
 Autologous and allogeneic transplants
 Two important requirements for a bone marrow
 transplant are the donor andthe recipient. Sometimes,
 the donor and the recipient may be the same person.
 This type of transplant is called an autologous transplant. It is typically used in cases in which a
 person’s bone marrow is generally healthy but will be
 destroyed due to medical treatment for diseases such
 as breast cancer and Hodgkin’s disease. Most bone
 marrow transplants are autologous. If a person’s
 bone marrow is unsuitable for an autologous trans
plant, the bone marrow must be derived from another
 person in an allogeneic transplant.
 Allogeneic transplants are more complicated
 because of proteins called humanlymphocyteantigens
 (HLA)that are on the surface of bone marrow cells. If
 the donor and the recipient have very dissimilar anti
gens, the recipient’s immune system regards the
 donor’s bone marrow cells as invaders and launches
 a destructive attack against them. Such an attack
 negates any benefits offered by the transplant.
 HLAmatching
 There are only five major HLA classes or types—
 designated HLA–A,–B,–C,–D, and class III—but
 much variation within the groupings. For example,
 HLA–A from one individual may be similar to, but
 not the same as, HLA–Ainanother individual; such a
 situation can render a transplant from one to the other
 impossible.
 HLA matching is more likely if the donor and
 recipient are related, particularly if they are siblings;
 however, an unrelated donor may be a potential
 match. Only in rare cases is matching HLA types
 between two people not an issue: if the recipient has an
 identical twin. Identical twins carry the same genes;
 therefore, the same antigens. A bone marrow transplant
 between identical twins is called a syngeneic transplant. 
 Peripheral blood stem cell transplants
 Bone marrow transplantation
 A relatively recent development in stem cell
 transplantation is the use of peripheral blood cells
 instead of stem cells from bone marrow. Peripheral
 blood stem cells (PBSCs) are obtained from circu
lating blood rather than from bone marrow, but
 the amount of stem cells found in the peripheral
 blood is much smaller than the amount of stem
 cells found in the bone marrow. Peripheral blood
 stem cells can be used in either autologous or
 allogeneic transplants. The majority of PBSC
 transplants are autologous. However, recent clini
cal studies indicate that PBSCs are being used
 more frequently than bone marrow for allogeneic
 bone marrow transplantation.
 The advantages of PBSC transplants when com
pared to bone marrow transplants are: in allogeneic
 transplantation, haematopoietic and immune recov
ery are faster with PBSCs which reduces the potential
 for disease recurrence, primarily graft-versus-host
disease. In autologous transplantation, the use of
 PBSCs can result in faster blood count recoveries.
 Also, some medical conditions exist in which the reci
pient cannot accept bone marrow stemcell transplants,
 but can accept PBSC transplants. Some possible dis
advantages to PBSC transplant versus bone marrow
 transplantation are: so much more fluid volume is
 necessary to collect enough PBSCs that, at the time of
 infusing the new stem cells into the recipient, the fluid
 can collect in the lungs or cause temporary kidney
 problems. Also, the time commitment for the donor
 for a PBSC transplant is considerable. When the
 PBSCs are being collected, several outpatient sessions
 are needed and each session lasts approximately two
four hours.
 The transplant procedure
 BONE MARROW TRANSPLANTATION. The bone
 marrow extraction, or harvest, is the same whether
 for an autologous or allogeneic transplant.
 Harvesting is done under general anesthesia (i.e., the
 donor sleeps through the procedure), and discomfort
 is usually minimal afterwards. Bone marrow is drawn
 from the iliac crest (the part of the hip bone to either
 side of the lower back) with a special needle and a
 syringe. Several punctures are usually necessary to
 collect the needed amount of bone marrow, approxi
mately 1–2 quarts (0.9–1.91). (This amount is only a
 small percentage of the total bone marrow and is
 typically replaced within four weeks.) The donor
 remains at the hospital for 24–48 hours and can
 resume normal activities within a few days.
 If the bone marrow is meant for an autologous
 transplant, it is stored at-112 to-320F (-80 to-196C) until it is needed. Bone marrow for an allo
geneic transplant is sometimes treated to remove the
 donor’s Tcells(atypeofwhitebloodcell)ortoremove
 ABO (blood type) antigens; otherwise, it is trans
planted without modification.
 The bone marrow is administered to the recipient
 via a catheter (a narrow, flexible tube) inserted into a
 large vein in the chest. From the bloodstream, it
 migrates to the cavities within the bones where bone
 marrowisnormallystored.Ifthe transplant is success
ful, the bone marrow begins to produce normal blood
 cells once it is in place, or engrafted.
 PERIPHERAL BLOOD STEM CELL TRANSPLAN
TATION. Before collection for a PBSC transplant,
 donors receive daily four injections of the drug
 G-CSF, or filgrastim. (Patients can give it to them
selves at home if need be.) These pretreatments stimu
late the body to release stem cells into the blood. After
 these pretreatments, the donors’ experience is similar
 to that of a whole blood donor’s experience— PBSC
 donors’ blood is collected at a clinic or hospital as an
 outpatient procedure. The differences are that several
 sessions will be needed over days or weeks and the
 blood is collected in a process called apheresis. The
 blood travels from one arm into a blood cell separator
 that removes only the stem cells, and the rest of the
 blood is returned back to the donor, in the other arm.
 The cells are then frozen for later use.
 ThePBSCsareadministeredtotherecipient using
 the samemethodsasthoseusedinbonemarrowtrans
plantation. As stated, the amount of fluid with PBSCs
 infused into the recipient’s body can be an issue.
 Costs
 Bonemarrowtransplantation is anexpensive pro
cedure. (Bone marrow donors are volunteers and do
 not pay for any part of the procedure.) Insurance
 companies and health maintenance organizations
 (HMOs) may not cover the costs.
 Preparation
 Abone marrow transplant recipient can expect to
 spendfourtoeightweeksinthehospital.Inpreparation
 for receiving the transplant, the recipient undergoes
 ‘‘conditioning’’—a preparative regimen in which the
 bone marrow and abnormal cells are destroyed.
 Conditioning rids the body of diseased cells and
 makes room for the marrow to be transplanted. It
 typically involves chemotherapy and/or radiation treatment, depending on the disease being treated.
 Unfortunately, this treatment also destroys healthy
 cells and has many side effects such as extreme weak
ness, nausea, vomiting,anddiarrhea. These side effects
 may continue for several weeks.
 Aftercare
 A two- to four-week waiting period follows the
 marrow transplant before its success can begin to be
 judged. The marrow recipient is kept in isolation dur
ing this time to minimize potential infections. The
 recipient also receives antibiotic medications and
 blood and platelet transfusions to help fight off infec
tion and prevent excessive bleeding. Further side
 effects, such as nausea and vomiting, can be treated
 with other medications. Once bloodcountsarenormal
 and the side effects of the transplant abate, the recipi
ent is taken off antibiotics and usually no longer needs
 blood and platelet transfusions.
 Following discharge from the hospital, the recipi
ent is monitored through home visits by nurses or out
patient visits for up to a year. For the first several
 months out of the hospital, the recipient needs to be
 careful in avoiding potential infections. For example,
 contact with other people who may be ill should be
 avoided or kept to aminimum. Furtherbloodtransfu
sions and medications may be necessary, but barring
 complications, the recipient can return to normal
 activities about 6–8 months after the transplant.
 Risks
 Bone marrow transplants are accompanied by
 serious and life-threatening risks. Furthermore, they
 are not always an absolute assurance of a cure for the
 underlying ailment; a disease may recur in the future.
 Approximately30%ofpeoplereceivingallogeneictrans
plants do not survive. Autologous transplants have a
 much better survival rate—nearly 90%—but are not
 appropriate for all types of ailments requiring a bone
 marrow transplant. Furthermore, they have a higher
 failure rate with certain diseases, specifically leukemia.
 In the short term, there is the danger of pneumonia
 or other infectious disease, excessive bleeding, or liver
 disorder caused by blocked blood vessels. The trans
plant mayberejectedby the recipient’s immune system,
 or the donor bone marrow may launch an immune
mediated attack against the recipient’s tissues. This
 complication is called acute graft versus host disease,
 andit canbealife-threatening condition. Characteristic
 signs of the disease include fever, rash, diarrhea, liver
 problems, and a compromised immune system.
 Approximately 25–50% of bone marrow trans
plant recipients develop long-term complications.
 Chronic graft versus host disease symptoms include
 skin changes such as dryness, altered pigmentation,
 and thickening; abnormal liver function tests;
 dry mouth and eyes; infections; and weight loss.
 Other long-term complications include cataracts (due
 to radiation treatment), abnormal lung function, hor
monal abnormalities resulting in reduced growth or
 hypothyroidism, secondary cancers, and infertility.
 Normal results
 In a successful bone marrow transplant, the
 donor’s marrow migrates to the cavities in the recipi
ent’s bones and produces normal numbers of healthy
 blood cells. Bone marrow transplants can extend a
 person’s life, improve quality of life, and may aid in
 curing the underlying ailment.
 In autologous bone marrow transplantation, stem
 cells are collected from the patient. Once the patient has
 undergone chemotherapy, the cells are replaced in the
 bloodviaanintravenouscatheter.Thecellsreturntothe
 bone marrow and begin producing healthy new cells.