 Definition
 Bone biopsy is the removal of a piece of bone
 for laboratory examination and analysis.
 Purpose
 Bone biopsy is used to distinguish between malig
nant tumors and benign bone disease such as osteo
porosis and osteomyelitis. This test may be ordered
 to determine why a patient’s bones ache or feel sore,
 or when a mass or deformity is found on an x ray,
 CT scan, bone scan, or other diagnostic imaging
 procedure.
 Precautions
 The patient’s doctor and the surgeon who per
forms the bone biopsy must be told about any pre
scription and over-the-counter medications the
 patient is taking, and about allergies or reactions the
 patient has had to anesthetics or pain relievers. Special
 care mustbetakenwithpatientswhohaveexperienced
 bleeding problems.
 Description
 A bone biopsy involves using a special drill or
 other surgical instruments to remove bone from the
 patient’s body. The procedure usually lasts about 30
 minutes and may be performed in the hospital, a doc
tor’s office, or a surgical center.
 Adrill biopsy is generally used to obtain a small
 specimen. After the skin covering the bone has been
 cleansed with an antiseptic and shaved, the patient
 is given a local anesthetic. The doctor will not begin
 the procedure until the anesthetic has numbed the
 area from which the bone is to be removed, but the
 patient may feel pressure or mild pain when
 the needle pierces the bone. The surgeon turns the
 needle in a half-circle to extract a sample from the
 core, or innermost part, of the bone. The sample is
 drawn into the hollow stem of the biopsy needle. The
 sample is then sent to a laboratory, where it is exam
ined under a microscope.
 Anopenbiopsyisusedwhenalargerspecimen is
 needed. After the area covering the bone has been
 cleansed with an antiseptic and shaved, the patient
 is given a general anesthetic. After the anesthetic
 takes effect and the patient is unconscious, the  surgeon makes an incision and removes a bone speci
men. The specimen is sent to the laboratory for
 immediate analysis. Results of that analysis may
 indicate that additional surgery should be performed
 right away.
 Preparation
 Nospecialpreparation isneededforadrillbiopsy,
 but a patient must fast for at least 12 hours before an
 open biopsy.
 Aftercare
 Pain medication will be prescribed after a biopsy,
 and vital signs will be monitored until they return to
 normal. Most patients can go home in about an hour.
 If bone was removed from the spine, the patient may
 stay in thehospital overnight. Thesurgical sitemust be
 kept clean and dry for 48 hours, and the patient’s
 doctor should be notified if any of these symptoms
 appear:
 fever
 headache
 pain on movement
 inflammation or pus near the biopsy site
 bleeding through the bandage at the biopsy site
 Risks
 Risks include bone fracture, injury to nearby
 tissue, and infection. Bleeding is a rare complication.
 Factors that increase risk include:
 stress
 obesity
 poor nutrition
 chronic illness
 some medications
 mind-altering drugs
 Normal results
 Normal bone is made up of collagen fibers and
 bone tissue.
 Abnormal results
 Bone biopsy can reveal the presence of benign
 disease, infection, or malignant tumors that have
 spread to the bone from other parts of the body.
 Results of this test are considered reliable, but
 may be affected by:
 failure to fast before open biopsy
 failure to obtain an adequate specimen
 delayed microscopic examination or laboratory
 analysis. 