 Definition
 Bone grafting is a surgical procedure by which
 new bone or a replacement material is placed into
 spaces between or around broken bone (fractures)or
 holes in bone (defects) to aid in healing.
 Purpose
 Bone grafting is used to repair bone fractures that
 are extremely complex, pose a significant risk to the
 patient, or fail to heal properly. Bone graft is also used
 to help fusion between vertebrae, correct deformities,
 or provide structural support for fractures of the
 spine. In addition to fracture repair, bone graft is
 used to repair defects in bone caused by birth defects,
 traumatic injury, or surgery for bone cancer.
 Description
 Bone is composed of a matrix, mainly made up
 of a protein called collagen. It is strengthened by  deposits of calcium and phosphate salts, called
 hydroxyapatite. Within and around this matrix are
 located the cells of the bones, which are of four types.
 Osteoblasts produce the bone matrix. Osteocytes
 are mature osteoblasts and serve to maintain the
 bone. Osteoclasts break down and remove bone tis
sue. Bone lining cells cover bone surfaces. Together,
 these four types of cells are responsible for building
 the bone matrix, maintaining it, and remodeling the
 bone as needed.
 There are three ways in which a bone graft can
 help repair a defect. The first is called osteogenesis, the
 formation of new bone by the cells contained within
 the graft. The second is osteoinduction, a chemical
 process in which molecules contained within the graft
 (bone morphogenetic proteins) convert the patient’s
 cells into cells that are capable of forming bone. The
 third is osteoconduction, a physical effect by which the
 matrix of the graft forms a scaffold on which cells in
 the recipient are able to form new bone.
 Newboneforgrafting canbeobtained from other
 bones in the patient’s own body (e.g., hip bones or
 ribs), called autograft, or from bone taken from other
 people that is frozen and stored in tissue banks, called
 allograft. A variety of natural and synthetic replace
mentmaterials arealso used instead ofbone,including
 collagen (the protein substance of the white fibers of
 the skin, bone, and connective tissues); polymers, such
 as silicone and some acrylics; hydroxyapatite; calcium
 sulfate; and ceramics. A newmaterial, calledresorbable
 polymeric grafts, is also being studied. These resorb
able grafts provide a structure for new bone to grow
 on; the grafts then slowly dissolve, leaving only the
 new bone behind.
 To place the graft, the surgeon makes an incision
 in the skin over the bone defect and shapes the bone
 graft or replacement material to fit into the defect.
 After the graft is placed into the defect, it is held in
 place with pins, plates, or screws. The incision is closed
 with stitches and a splint or cast is used to prevent
 movement of the bones while healing.
 Thecosts associated with a bone graft vary. These
 costs include: the surgeon’s fee (variable); anesthesiol
ogist’s fees (averaging $350 to $400 per hour); hospital
 charges (averaging $1,500 to $1,800 per day, more for
 intensive care or private rooms); medication charges
 ($200 to $400); and additional charges, including an
 assisting surgeon, treatment of complications, diag
nostic procedures (e.g., blood work or x rays), medical
 supplies, and equipment use. The cost for the graft
 itself can range from $250 to $900.
 This procedure is covered by many third-party
 insurers; insurance coverage should be explored for
 each individual case.
 Aftercare
 The time required for convalescence for fractures
 or spinal fusion may vary from one to 10 days, and
 vigorous exercise may be limited for up to three
 months.
 Most bone grafts are successful in helping the
 bone defect to heal. The extent of recovery will depend
 on the size of the defect and the condition of the bone
 surrounding the graft at the time of surgery. Severe
 defects may take some time to heal and may require
 further attention after the initial graft. In one study of
 over 1,000 patients who received very large allografts
 after surgery for bone cancer, researchers found that
 approximately 85% of the patients were able to return
 to work or normal physical activities without using
 crutches. However, about 25% of these patients
 required a second operation, because the first did not
 heal properly. Less severe bone defects, though,
 should heal completely without serious complications.
 Risks
 The risks for any surgical procedure requiring
 anesthesia include reactions to the medications and
 breathing problems. The risks for any surgical proce
dure include bleeding and infection. 
 The drawbacks of autografts include: the addi
tional surgical and anesthesia time (typically 30 min
utes per procedure) to obtain, or harvest, the bone for
 grafting; added costs of the additional surgery; pain
 and infection that might occur at the site from which
 the graft is taken; and the relatively small amount of
 bone that is available for grafting.
 The drawbacks of allografts include: variability
 between lots, since the bone is harvested from avariety
 of donors; the bone may take longer to incorporate
 with the host bone than an autograft would; the graft
 may be less effective than an autograft; and the possi
bility of transferring diseases to the patient. Other
 complications may result from the immune response
 mounted by the patient’s immune system against the
 grafted bone tissue. With the use anti-rejection agents
 (drugs to combat rejection of grafted bone tissue)
 immune rejection is less of a problem.