 Definition
 A bone scan is a diagnostic procedure used to
 evaluate abnormalities involving bones and joints. A
 radioactive substance is injected intravenously, and
 the image of its distribution in the skeletal system is
 analyzed to detect certain diseases or conditions. 
  Purpose
 Bone scans are most frequently ordered to check
 whether a cancer that originated elsewhere has spread
 to the bones. Cancers that begin in the breasts,
 kidneys, lungs, prostate, thyroid, or urinary bladder
 are most likely to spread, or metastasize, to the bones.
 If metastases are found, periodic bone scans may be
 ordered to see if therapy is effective against a cancer.
 Some cancers arise in bone. These are called pri
mary bone cancers. When an abnormality is found on
 an x ray of a bone, a bone scan may be helpful in
 deciding if it is a primary bone cancer, or a non-can
cerous (benign) condition.
 Infection in the bone (osteomyelitis) can be
 detected or confirmed by a bone scan, often days or
 weeks before an x ray would reveal it. Bone scans are
 useful in diagnosing early arthritic changes, and mon
itoring both the progression of the disease and the
 effectiveness of treatment. Unexplained pain may be
 evaluated with a bone scan, because it can demon
strate fractures that are difficult to detect on x ray.
 Bone scans can be used to see if artificial joints have
 loosened or become infected. Suspected child abuse
 may be evaluated with a bone scan, due to its ability
 to show an overall pattern of repeated trauma.
 Abnormalities caused by altered circulation to the
 bone may be diagnosed with a bone scan.
 Precautions
 Womenwhoarepregnantorbreastfeedingshould
 not have this test. A patient who is unable to remain
 still for an extended period of time may require seda
tion for a bone scan.
 Description
 This test is performedinaradiologyfacility, either
 in a hospital department or an outpatient x-ray center.
 The patient usually sits or lies down while a radio
active substance is injected through a vein in the arm.
 For a bone scan, the radionuclide used is specifically
 chosen to accumulate in the bone. The patient then waits from three to four hours, for the substance to
 collect within the skeletal system. During this time, he
 or she will be instructed to drink several glasses of
 water. Patients are free to get up and move around as
 they desire during this waiting time, and should uri
nate frequently. Just before the scanning begins, the
 patient should empty his or her bladder again. This
 ensures that a lot of radioactive material is not con
centrated in the urinary bladder, which could obscure
 part of the pelvic bones.
 During the scan, the patient lies on his or her back
 on a table, but may be repositioned to the stomach or
 side during the study. It is important for the patient not
 to move, except when directed to by the technologist.
 The radionuclide scanner, sometimes called a
 gamma camera, or scintillation camera, is positioned
 against the body part to be examined. Either the cam
era, the table, or both, may change position during
 the study. For a total body bone scan, the patient is
 scanned from head to foot, over a period of 30-60
 minutes. Patients should experience no discomfort
 from this examination.
 A special kind of bone scan, called a SPECT
 (Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography)
 scan may be added, to study a particular part of the
 body in more detail. Suspected diseases of the hips,
 lowerback,orjawareoftenevaluatedusingthisstudy.
 It usually takes an additional 30-45 minutes. The cam
era circles completely around the area in question or
 multiple cameras are used to create a cross-sectional
 image. This helps pinpoint the location of the abnorm
ality being evaluated.
 The bone scan might be done in phases. The pro
cedure is the same, except the scanning takes place
 immediately after the radioactive substance is injected,
 thenagainatsetintervals toimagehowtheradioactive
 tracer pools and distributes in the body and bone. For
 example, a two-phase bone scan for osteomyelitis may
 involve a scan about five minutes after injection, then
 about three hours later.
 Preparation
 Some specialized blood studies should be drawn
 before this study is begun. Jewelry or metallic objects
 need to be removed. No other special physical pre
paration is required.
 The patient should understand that there is no
 danger of radioactive exposure to themselves or others,
 asonlysmallamountsoftheradioisotopeareused.The
 total dose of radiation absorbed is minimal, often less
 than the amount received from ordinary x rays. The
 radionuclide scanner does not emit any radiation at all,
 but detects and records it from the patient.
 Aftercare
 Fluids are encouraged after the scan to aid in the
 excretion of the radioisotope. It is almost completely
 eliminated from the body within 24 hours. However,
 since increased airport security methods resulting from
 the September11,2001attacks,isolated cases of people
 who have had recent diagnostic nuclear medicine pro
cedures setting off airport security systems have
 occurred. One state’s Homeland Security Department
 has warnedpeople having nuclear medicine procedures
 and flying soon afterward to bring adequate documen
tation of the procedure along to the airport.
 Normal results
 The normal appearance of the scan will vary
 according to the patient’s age. In general, a uniform
 concentration of radionuclide uptake is present in all
 bones in a normal scan.
 Abnormal results
 A high concentration of radionuclide occurs in
 areas of increased bone activity. These regions appear
 brighter and may be referred to as ‘‘hot spots.’’ They
 may indicate healing fractures, tumors, infections, or
 otherprocessesthattrigger newboneformation.Lower
 concentrations of radionuclide may be called ‘‘cold
 spots.’’ Poor blood flow to an area of bone, or bone
 destruction from a tumor may produce a cold spot.
 Thebonescanisaverysensitive test and can detect
 subtle conditions more readily than other studies.
 However, it is not a very specific examination, and
 often cannot distinguish exactly what disease process
 is causinganabnormality.Resultsneedtobecorrelated
 with the patient’s medical history, and other radiologic
 and laboratory studies to make a definite diagnosis.