 Definition
 Bone xrays are a diagnostic test in which ionizing
 radiation passing through the bones being examined
 enables an image to be produced on film.
 Purpose
 Bone x rays are ordered to detect disease or injury
 to the bone such as broken bones, tumors, and other
 problems. They can determine bone density, texture,
 erosion, and changes in bone relationships. Bone x rays
 also evaluate the joints for diseases such as osteoarthritis.
 Precautions
 Precautions should be taken to protect patients
 from unnecessary exposure to radiation. Patients should
 be shielded with lead aprons as much as possible.
 Women of childbearing age who could be pregnant
 should not have x rays of their trunk or pelvic regions.
 The fetus is especially at risk during the first trimester of
 pregnancy. Women who are pregnant should not have x
 rays of their pelvic region, lumbar spine, and abdomen
 unless absolutely necessary. If other types of x rays are
 necessary, a lead apron should be used to shield the
 abdominal and pelvic regions.
 Description
 X rays are a common diagnostic test in which a
 form of energy called x-ray radiation penetrates the
 patient’s body. In bone x rays, electrical current passes
 throughanx-raytubeandproducesabeamofionizing
 radiation that passes through the bone(s) being exam
ined. This produces a picture of the inside of the body
 on film. The physician reads the developed x ray on a
 wall-mounted light box.
 Digital x rays are a new type of x ray in which
 conventional equipment is used to take the x ray but
 the image is produced via computer. In a digital x ray,
 the image is created on a reusable plate. After being
 read by a laser reader, the information is sent in digital
 formtoastorageunitconnectedtoacomputernetwork
 from whichthe radiologist reads the image. An electro
nic report can then be sent to the patient’s physician.
 Problems with bones that x rays can detect result
 frominjury orfromdisease causedbyamalfunctionin
 the patient’s bone chemistry. Bone injuries, especially
 broken bones (fractures), are common and can be
 accurately diagnosed by bone x rays. X rays are especially helpful in diagnosing simple and incomplete
 fractures that can’t be detected during a physical
 examination. X rays can also be used to check for
 bone position in a fracture. Some bone diseases can
 be definitively diagnosed with bone x rays while others
 require additional tests.
 Osteoporosis, a common bone disease, can be
 detected in bone xraysbutother tests are then ordered
 to determine the extent of the disease. For osteomala
cia and rickets, a blood test and x rays of the affected
 bone areusually definitive; in some cases a bone biopsy
 (microscopic analysis of a small amount of tissue) is
 also done. InararebonediseasecalledPaget’s disease,
 x rays may be used in conjunction with bone, blood,
 and urine tests to make a diagnosis. In another rare
 bone disease, fibrous dysplasia, bone x rays or a bone
 biopsy (microscopic analysis of a small amount of
 tissue) are used to confirm the diagnosis. Bone x rays
 are definitive in diagnosing osteogenesis imperfecta.
 For osteomyelitis, bone x rays are used in conjunction
 with a blood test, bone scan, or needle biopsy to make
 the diagnosis. For arthritis, x rays of the bone are
 occasionally used in conjunction with blood tests.
 For bone tumors, bone x rays are helpful but they
 may not be definitive.
 Bonexraysareperformedbyatechnologist,and
 interpreted by a radiologist. They are taken in a physi
cian’s office, radiologydepartment,outpatientclinic, or
 diagnostic clinic. Bone x rays generally take less than 10 minutes. There is no pain or discomfort associated
 with the test, but some people find it difficult to remain
 still. The results are often available in minutes.
 During the test, the patient lies on a table. The
 technologist taking the x ray will check the patient’s
 positioning and place the x-ray machine over the part
 of the body being examined. After asking the patient
 to remain motionless, he or she steps out of the area
 and presses a button to take the picture.
 Preparation
 The patient is asked to remove clothing, jewelry,
 andanyothermetalobjectsfromtheareabeingxrayed.
 If appropriate, a lead shield will be placed over other
 body parts to minimize exposure to radiation.
 Aftercare
 The patient can immediately resume normal
 activities.
 Risks
 The human body contains some natural radia
tion and is also exposed to radiation in the environ
ment.Thereisaslightriskfromexposuretoradiation
 during bonexrays,however,theamountofradiation
 is small and the risk of harm is very low. If reprod
uctive organs are exposed to radiation, genetic
 alterations may occur. Excessive or repeated doses
 of radiation can cause changes in other types of
 body tissue. No radiation remains in the body after
 the x ray.
 Normal results
 Normal bones show no fractures, dislocations,or
 other abnormalities.
 Abnormal results
 Results that indicate the presence of bone injury
 or disease differ in appearance according to the nature
 of the injury/disease. For example, fractures show up
 as clear breaks in the bones, while osteoporotic bone
 has the same shape as anormal boneonanxraybutis
 less dense. Even though a bone x ray may not show
 definite results, it often is the first imaging choice, to be
 followed up by another imaging technique such as
 magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Bone x rays are
 still the easiest was to show a typical bone fracture and
 to check on healing of broken bones.