 Definition
 Bowel preparation is a procedure usually underta
ken before a diagnostic procedure or treatment can be
 initiated for certain colorectal diseases. Bowel prepara
tion is a cleansing of the intestines from fecal matter and
 secretions.
 Purpose
 The ultimate goal of bowel preparation is to empty
 and cleanse the bowel for a diagnostic procedure (using
 x rays to detect a disease process in the intestines) or for
 surgical intervention (such as removal of polyps, cancer,
 or narrowing of the intestinal diameter). Colonoscopy is
 an effective treatment procedure for polyps (a growing
 mass of tissue). This procedure enables the doctor to
 visualize the entire large bowel. During a colonoscopy,
 polyps can be cauterized (applying an electric current
 whichincineratesthepolyp).Theprocedurecanbeboth
 diagnostic and therapeutic. A sigmoidoscopy scope is a
 flexible tube that allows clinicians to view the sigmoid
 colon (the part of the large intestine before the rectum).
 This procedure is important for detection of colorectal
 cancer. It is safe, quick to perform (usually 30–45 min
utes in about 90% of cases), and an effective diagnostic
 tool for evaluation of:
 rectal bleeding
 other abnormalities detected by imaging studies
 removal of polyps
 biopsy
 evaluation of chronic diarrhea or inflammatory
 bowel disease
 recurrences of colorectal cancer or polyps 
 relieving a twisted bowel
 foreign body removal
 treating bleeding lesions
 preventive surveillance of cancer in patients with a
 positive family history of colon cancer
 Precautions
 Antibiotic prophylaxis is not routinely recom
mended. In some cases of prosthetic heart valves,
 antibiotics can be prescribed. Evidence exists that
 evacuation of intestinal waste products in conjunction
 with antibiotics before (prophylactic) the procedure
 reduces the possibility of sepsis (infection which
 spreads from the primary site to blood).
 Description
 The bowel is emptied of any contents for such
 procedures as barium enema (introducing a compound
 containing barium to promote better visualization of
 intestines during x rays) orcolonoscopy. Preparation of
 the bowel distally—from the rectum—is necessary for
 such diagnostic procedures as sigmoidoscopy. Bowel
 emptying is donethroughtaking orallaxative solutions
 that speed up the excretion of the contents of the lower
 bowel together with restrictions on solid food intake.
 A newer type of imaging study may eventually
 make current laxative methods of bowel preparation
 obsolete. According to a group of researchers in the
 United Kingdom, computed tomography (CT) colo
nography (sometimes called virtual colonoscopy) has
 shown itself to be as accurate in diagnosing colorectal
 tumors as optical colonoscopy. CT colonography
 allows a radiologist to examine the colon and nearby
 organs in less than 30 seconds.
 Preparation
 Bowel preparation for visualization of the colon is
 performed to ensure the procedure will be accurate and
 complete. There are several effective cleansing prepara
tions including polyethylene glycol solution (Colyte),
 sodium phosphate solution (Phospho-Soda), magne
sium citrate with bisacodyl tablets, and castor oil with bisacodyl tablets. One of these preparations should be
 administered starting at 4:00 p.m. the day before the
 procedure. Patients are usually asked to avoid solid
 foods for about 36 hours before diagnostic procedures.
 Such clear liquids as vegetable or beef broth, apple or
 white grape juice, soda pop or fruit-flavored gelatin are
 permitted, although some doctors ask patients to avoid
 red-colored beverages or gelatin flavors on the grounds
 that the red food coloring in these products may make
 bleeding more difficult to detect.
 In mostcases, patients may continue to take other
 prescription medications at the usual times while they
 are restricted to clear liquids. It is a good idea, how
ever, to check with the doctor beforehand.
 Aftercare
 Patients should have a friend or relative to drive
 them home after the procedure, as the combination of
 a period of dietary restriction, frequent bowel move
ments, and the procedure itself leaves most people
 feeling tired and slightly weak. Many doctors advise
 patients to postpone vigorous physical activity or
 work requiring mental concentration until the day
 after the procedure. Patients can resume eating solid
 foods as soon as they get home.
 Somepatients may notice a small amountof blood
 on toilet tissue or underwear following a colonoscopy
 or other examination of the lower digestive tract.
 Spotting is not cause for concern; however, patients
 who have steady or heavy bleeding from the rectum
 should call their doctor as soon as possible.
 Risks
 The current standard of care dictates that patients
 receive antibiotic prophylaxis if they are at increased risk
 of developing an infection. High-risk patients include
 those with cardiac diseases or patients with prostheses.
 Bowel preparation can be stressful for some
 patients, particularly those with pre-existing nutri
tional problems associated with cancer treatment or
 malabsorption. In addition, many patients find the
 various oral solutions unpleasant to the taste and
 difficult to swallow for that reason. According to one
 British study, oral solutions flavored with lemon are
 more acceptable to patients than unflavored forms.
 Both Colyte and Phospho-Soda are available with
 flavoring added; patients may wish to ask their phar
macist for these specific products. Mild nausea, vomit
ing, stomach cramps, intestinal gas, dry mouth, and
 increased thirst are common side effects of these pro
ducts. Somepatientsare helped bytakinganelectrolyte
 supplement along with oral sodium phosphate solu
tion to lower the risk of dehydration.
 Some people may have severe allergic reactions
 to commonly used oral laxatives used for bowel pre
paration. Patients who develop hives, swelling of the
 face or hands, swelling or tingling in the throat or
 mouth, difficulty breathing, or tightness in the chest
 should call their doctor at once. This type of reaction is
 a medical emergency.
 Normal results
 Absence of anatomical changes or abnormalities
 in the intestines would result in normal diagnosis.
  Abnormal results
 Polyps can be treated with electrocautery. A
 biopsy is taken of any suspicious polyps and further
 analyzed. Sigmoidoscopy can detect masses, bleeding,
 and ulcerative disease.