 Definition
 Brain abscess is a bacterial infection within the
 brain.
 Description
 The brain is usually well insulated from infection
 by bacteria, protected by the skull, the meninges (tis
sue layers surrounding the brain), the immune system,
 and the highly regulated barrier between the blood
stream and the brain. Under certain circumstances,
 however, bacteria can invade the brain and cause a
 localized infection called an abscess. Brain abscess is
 relatively rare, accounting for 1 in 10,000 hospital
 admissions. Single abscess occurs in 75% of cases,
 and the remainder of cases involve multiple abscesses.
 If not treated, brain abscess is almost always fatal.
 Causes and symptoms
 One-half of all brain abscesses are caused by the
 spread of bacteria from a nearby infection. Sources of
 bacteria include:
 middle ear infections (otitis media)orinfectionsinthe
 bony spaces in front of the middle ear (mastoiditis)
 sinus infections
 an abscessed tooth.
 Other sources of bacteria include lung infections,
 abdominalinfection, infection of the heart’s lining (endo
carditis) penetrating heart wounds, and neurosurgery.
 Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS)
 or the presence of another immune deficiency greatly
 increases the risk of brain abscess. Approximately
 25%of cases have no detectable cause of infection.
 Brain abscess can be caused by a variety of organ
isms, many of them related to ear and sinus infections.
 Many times brain abscess cases are caused by two or
 more bacteria. In 30–60% of cases, the bacteria
 combination includes streptococci, microorganisms
 that can live without oxygen (anaerobes), and enter
obacteria. A small number of cases are caused by
 yeast, fungi, and single-cell organisms (protozoa).
 The symptoms of brain abscess often develop
 slowly, usually within a period of about two weeks.
 The most common symptoms are:
 headache
 neurologic symptoms related to the specific part of
 the brain that is infected
  altered mental status
 seizures
 Diagnosis
 Diagnosis of brain abscess is performed by using
 a computed tomography scan (CT) or a magnetic
 resonance imaging (MRI) scan to determine the site of
 infection. Tissue removal (biopsy) is usually performed
 as well. A biopsy is performed to determine the type of
 bacterium involved. Biopsies can also be used to rule
 out tumor or other noninfectious localized lesions,
 which may look the same on the scans.
 Other tests are performed to determine the source
 of the infection. These tests include blood cultures,
 x rays of the chest, and a physical exam of the ears,
 sinuses, and teeth. A test for human immunodeficiency
 virus (HIV) is usually also performed.
 Treatment
 Treatment for brain abscess begins with intrave
nous antibiotics, chosen to match the infecting bacter
ium if known, or to cover a wide spectrum of
 possibilities if not. Treatment usually continues for
 six to eight weeks.
 Aspiration surgery is almost always done to drain
 the abscess. In this procedure, a needle is guided to the
 infected site by CT scan, and fluid is removed (aspi
rated) from the abscess. Aspiration may be repeated
 several times until the bacteria are completely killed or
 removed. Surgical removal of infected or dead tissue
 may be needed in some cases. For patients with many
 sites of infection, aspiration or surgical removal is not
 done because of the increased difficulty and risk of the
 procedure. For these patients, antibiotic therapy alone
 is used. Steroid treatment is controversial, but may be
 indicated in some cases.
 Prognosis
 Evenwithprompttreatment,brain abscess is fatal
 in about 20% of cases. About half of those who
 survive have some residual neurological problems,
 including seizures in many patients.
 Thereareseveral reasons whypatientswithbrain
 abscess can have a poor prognosis. The illness may
 not be diagnosed correctly or an accurate diagnosis
 maytakeadditional time. The patient may receive an
 antibiotic that does not match the infecting organ
ism. Sometimes the infection may not be limited to a
 definite area in the brain,makingdiagnosisandtreat
ment difficult. The small number of cases caused by
 fungal infection may take additional time to diag
nose. A patient may also have a poor prognosis
 because there is more than one abscess, the location
 of the abscess may be deep within the brain, or the
 infection mayhavemovedintomanylocationswithin
 the brain. Severe complications can result from
 brain abscess, including comma and brain rupture.
 In 80-100% of cases involving brain rupture, the
 patient dies.
 Prevention
 Brain abscess may be preventable by prompt and
 aggressive treatment of the infections which give rise
 to it, especially sinus and ear infections.