Definition
 Breast reduction is a surgical procedure per
formed in order to decrease the size of the breasts.
 Purpose
 Women with very large breasts (macromastia or
 mammaryhyperplasia) seek breast reduction for relief
 of pain in the back, shoulder, and neck. They may also
 feel uncomfortable about their breast size and have
 difficulty finding clothing that will fit properly.
 Additionally, breast reduction may be needed after
 reconstructive surgery following the surgical removal
 of cancerous breast tissue (mastectomy), to make the
 breasts more symmetric.
 Men who have enlarged breasts (gynecomastia)
 may also be candidates for breast reduction.
 However, excessive alcohol intake, smokingmarijuana,
 or using anabolic steroids may cause gynecomastia,
 and surgery is not recommended for men who con
tinue to use these products. Precautions
 Breast reduction is not recommended for women
 whose breasts are not fully developed or who plan to
 breast feed.
 Description
 Breast reduction may also be called reduction mam
maplasty. It is most often done in the hospital, under
 general anesthetic. However, studies have suggested that
 an outpatient procedure, using local anesthetic and mild
 sedation may be appropriate for some patients. The
 operation takes approximately two to four hours. The
 most commonly made incision encircles the areola (dar
kened area around the nipple) and extends downward
 and around the underside of the breast. This produces
 the least conspicuous scar. The excess tissue, fat, and
 skin are removed, and the nipple and areola are reposi
tioned. In certain cases, liposuction (fat suctioning) is
 used to remove extra fat from the armpit area. A hospi
tal stay of up to three days may be needed for recovery.
 If deemed medically necessary, breast reduction is
 covered bysomeinsuranceplans.However,aspecified
 amount of breast tissue may need to be removed in
 order to qualify for coverage. Surgeon’s fees range
 from $4,800-$6,500 and up.
 Preparation
 Consultation between surgeon and patient is
 important to ensure that the woman understands and
 agrees with the expected final results of the procedure.
 Measurements and photographs may be taken. Many
 doctors also recommend a mammogram before the
 operation, to make sure there is no cancer.
 Aftercare
 After the surgery, an elastic bandage or special
 supportive bra is placed over gauze bandages and drai
nage tubes. The bandages and tubes are removed in a
 day or two. The bra will need to be worn around the
 clock for several weeks. Stitches are removed one to
 three weeks after the operation. Normal activities,
 including sexual relations may be restricted for several
 weeks. Scars will typically remain red, and perhaps
 lumpy for up to several months, but will gradually fade
 and become less noticeable. It may take up to a year
 before the breasts achieve their final position and size.
 Risks
 Risks common to any operation include bleeding,
 infection, anesthesia reactions, or unexpected scarring.
 Breast reduction may result in decreased feeling in the
 breasts or nipples and/or impaired ability tobreastfeed.
 When healing is complete, the breasts may be slightly
 uneven, or the nipples may be asymmetric.
 Normal results
 Smaller breast size should be achieved, and with
 that, the accompanyingpainanddiscomfortshouldbe
 alleviated.