 Definition
 Breast cancer is caused by the development of
 malignant cells in the breast. The malignant cells
 originate in the lining of the milk glands or ducts of
 the breast (ductal epithelium), defining this malig
nancy as a cancer. Cancer cells are characterized by
 uncontrolled division leading to abnormal growth
 and the ability of these cells to invade normal tissue
 locally or to spread throughout the body, ina process
 called metastasis.
 Description
 Breast cancer arises in the milk-producing
 glands of the breast tissue. Groups of glands in
 normalbreasttissuearecalledlobules. Theproducts
 of these glands are secreted into a ductal system that
 leads to the nipple. Depending on where in the
 glandular or ductal unit of the breast the cancer
 arises, it will develop certain characteristics that
 are used to sub-classify breast cancer into types.
 The pathologist will denote the subtype at the time of
 evaluation with the microscope. Ductal carcinoma  begins in the ducts, lobular carcinoma has a pattern
 involving the lobules or glands. The more important
 classification is related to the evaluated tumor’s cap
ability to invade, as this characteristic defines the
 disease as a true cancer. The stage before invasive
 cancer is called in situ, meaning that the early malig
nancy has not yet become capable of invasion. Thus,
 ductal carcinoma in situ is considered a minimal
 breast cancer.
 How breast cancer spreads
 The primary tumor begins in the breast itself but
 once it becomes invasive, it may progress beyond the
 breast to the regional lymph nodes or travel (metasta
size) to other organ systems in the body and become
 systemic in nature. Lymph is the clear, protein-rich
 fluid that bathes the cells throughout the body.
 Lymph will work its way back to the bloodstream via
 small channels known as lymphatics. Along the way,
 the lymph is filtered through cellular stations known
 as nodes, thus they are called lymph nodes. Nearly all
 organs in the body have a primary lymph node group
 filtering fluid that comes from that organ. In the
 breast, the primary lymph nodes are under the armpit,
 or axilla. Classically, the primary tumor begins in the
 breast and the first place to which it is likely to spread
 is the regional lymph nodes. Cancer, as it invades in
 its place of origin, may also work its way into blood
 vessels. If cancer gets into the blood vessels, the blood  vessels provide yet another route for the cancer to
 spread to other organs of the body.
 Breast cancer follows this classic progression
 though it often becomes systemic or widespread early
 in the course of the disease. By the time one can feel a
 lump in the breast it is often 0.4 inches, or one centi
meter, in size and contains roughly a million cells. It is
 estimated that a tumor of this size may take one to five
 years to develop. During that time, the cancer may
 metastasize, or spread by lymphatics or blood to areas
 elsewhere in the body.
 When primary breast cancer spreads, it may first
 go to the axillary nodes. If this occurs, regional metas
tasis exists. If it proceeds elsewhere either by lymphatic
 or blood-borne spread, the patient develops systemic
 metastasis that may involve a number of other organs
 in the body. Favorite sites of systemic involvement for
 breast cancer are the lung, bones, liver, and the skin  andsoft tissue. As it turns out, the presence of, and the
 actual number of, regional lymph nodes containing
 cancer remains the single best indicator of whether or
 not the cancer has become widely metastatic. Because
 tests to discover metastasis in other organs may not be
 sensitive enough to reveal minute deposits, the evalua
tion of the axilla for regional metastasis becomes very
 important in making treatment decisions for this
 disease.
 If breast cancer spreads to other major organs of
 the body, its presence will compromise the function of
 those organs. Death is the result of extreme compro
mise of vital organ function.
 Demographics
 Every woman is at risk for breast cancer. If she
 lives to be 85, there is a one out of nine chance that she
 will develop the condition sometime during her life. As
 a woman ages, her risk of developing breast cancer
 rises dramatically regardless of her family history. The  breast cancer risk of a 25-year-old woman is only one
 out of 19,608; by age 45, it is one in 93. In fact, less
 than 5% of cases are discovered before age 35 and
 the majority of all breast cancers are found in women
 over age 50. 
  In 2002, 200,000 new cases of breast cancer were
 diagnosed. About 45,000 women die of breast cancer
 each year, accounting for 16% of deaths caused by
 cancer in women. However, deaths from breast cancer
 are declining in recent years, a reflection of earlier
 diagnosis from screening mammograms and improv
ing therapies.
 Causes and symptoms
 There are a number of risk factors for the devel
opment of breast cancer, including:
 family history of breast cancer in mother or sister
 early onset of menstruation and late menopause
 reproductive history: women who had no children or
 have children after age 30 and women who have
 never breastfed have increased risk
 history of abnormal breast biopsies
 Though these are recognized risk factors, it is
 important to note that more than 70% of women
 who get breast cancer have no known risk factors.
 Having several risk factors may boost a woman’s
 chances of developing breast cancer, but the interplay
 of predisposing factors is complex. In addition to
 those accepted factors listed above, some studies sug
gest that high-fat diets, obesity, or the use of alcohol
 maycontribute to the risk profile. Another factor that
 contributes to a woman’s risk profile is hormone
 replacement therapy (HRT).
 HRT provides significant relief of menopausal
 symptoms, prevention of osteoporosis, and possibly
 protection from cardiovascular disease and stroke.
 While physicians have long known a small increased
 risk for breast cancer was linked to use of HRT, a
 landmark study released in 2003 proved the risk was
 greater than thought. The Women’s Health Initiative
 found that even relatively short-term use of estrogen
 plus progestin is associated with increased risk of
 breast cancer, diagnosis at a more advanced stage of
 the disease, and a higher number of abnormal mam
mograms. The longer a woman used HRT, the more
 her risk increased.
 Of all the risk factors listed above, family history
 is the most important. In The Biological Basis of
 Cancer, the authors estimate that about half of all
 familial breast cancer cases (families in which there is
 a high breast cancer frequency) have mutations affect
ing the genes BRCA-1 or BRCA-2. In 2003, scientists
 discovered athirdgenecalled EMSY.However,breast
 cancer due to heredity is only a small proportion of
 breast cancer cases; only 5%–10% of all breast cancer
 cases will be women who inherited a susceptibility
 through their genes. Nevertheless, when the family
 history is strong for development of breast cancer, a
 woman’s risk is increased.
 Notalllumpsdetectedinthebreast are cancerous.
 Fibrocystic changes in the breast are extremely com
mon.Alsoknownasfibrocystic condition of the breast,
 fibrocystic changes are a leading cause of non
cancerous lumps in the breast. Fibrocystic changes
 also cause symptoms of pain, swelling, or discharge
 and maybecomeevident tothe patient or physician as
 alumpthatiseithersolid orfilled with fluid. Complete
 diagnostic evaluation of any significant breast
 abnormality is mandatory because though women
 commonly develop fibrocystic changes, breast cancer
 is common also, and the signs and symptoms of fibro
cystic changes overlap with those of breast cancer.
 Certain benign changes in the breast may now be
 linked to increased risk for breast cancer.
 Diagnosis
 The diagnosis of breast cancer is accomplished
 by the biopsy of any suspicious lump or mammo
graphic abnormality that has been identified.
 (A biopsy is the removal of tissue for examination
 by a pathologist. A mammogram is a low-dose,
 2-view, x-ray examination of the breast.) The patient
 may be prompted to visit her doctor upon finding a
 lump in a breast, or she may have noticed skin dim
pling, nipple retraction, or discharge from the nipple.
 A patient may not have noticed a symptom or
 abnormality, and a lump was detected by a screening
 mammogram.
 When a patient has no signs or symptoms
 Screening involves the evaluation of women who
 have no symptoms or signs of a breast problem.
 Mammography has been helpful in detecting breast
 cancer that cannot be identified on physical examina
tion. However, 10%–13% of breast cancer does not
 show up on mammography, and a similar number of
 patients with breast cancer have an abnormal mam
mogram and a normal physical examination. These
 figures emphasize the need for examination as part of
 the screening process.
 Screening
 It is recommendedthatwomengetintothehabitof
 doing monthly breast self examinations to detect any
 lump at an early stage. If an uncertainty or a lump is
 found, evaluation by an experienced physician and a  mammogram is recommended. The American Cancer
 Society (ACS) has made recommendations for the use
 of mammography on a screening basis. In 2003, the
 ACSupdated its guidelines concerning screening mam
mograms. The most notable change was that women
 should begin annual screening at age 40 instead of age
 50. (in the past, the ACS, recommended beginning
 mammograms at age 40, but only ever one or two
 years instead of annually.) Women at higher risk for
 breast cancer should benefit from beginning screenings
 at earlier ages and at more frequent intervals.
 Because of the greater awareness of breast cancer
 in recent years, screening evaluations by examinations
 and mammography are performed much more fre
quently than in the past. The result is that the number
 of breast cancers diagnosed increased, but the disease is
 being diagnosedatanearlier stage thanpreviously.The
 earlier the stage of disease at the time it is discovered,
 the better the long-term outcome (prognosis) becomes.
 When a patient has physical signs or symptoms
 A common finding that leads to diagnosis is the
 presence of a lump within the breast. Skin dimpling,
 nipple retraction, or discharge from the nipple are less
 frequent initial findings prompting biopsy. Though
 bloody nipple discharge is distressing, it is most often
 caused by benign disease. Skin dimpling or nipple
 retraction in the presence of an underlying breast
 mass on examination is a more advanced finding.
 Actual skin involvement, with edema or ulceration of
 the skin, are late findings.
 Thepresence ofabreast lump isacommonsignof
 breast cancer. If the lump is suspicious and the patient
 has not had a mammogram by this point, a study
 should be done on both breasts prior to anything else
 so that the original characteristics of the lesion can be
 studied. The opposite breast should also be evaluated
 mammographically to determine if other problems
 exist that were undetected by physical examination.
 Whether an abnormal screening mammogram or
 one of the signs mentioned above followed by a mam
mogram prompted suspicion, the diagnosis is estab
lished by obtaining tissue by biopsy of the area. There
 are different types of biopsy, each utilized with its own
 indication. If signs of widespread metastasis are
 already present, biopsy of the metastasis itself may
 establish diagnosis.
 Biopsy
 Dependingonthesituation,differenttypesofbiopsy
 may be performed. The types include incisional and
 excisional biopsies. In an incisional biopsy, the physician
 takes a sample of tissue, and in excisional biopsy,
 themassisremoved.Fineneedle aspiration biopsy and
 core needle biopsy are kinds of incisional biopsies.
 FINE NEEDLE ASPIRATION BIOPSY. In a fine needle
 aspiration biopsy, a fine-gauge needle may be passed
 into the lesion and cells from the area suctioned into
 the needle can be quickly prepared for microscopic
 evaluation (cytology). (The patient experiencing nip
ple discharge also can have a sample taken of the
 discharge for cytological evaluation.) Fine needle
 aspiration is a simple procedure that can be done
 under local anesthesia, and will tell if the lesion is a
 fluid-filled cyst or whether it is solid. The sample
 obtained will yield much diagnostic information.
 Fine needle aspiration biopsy is an excellent technique
 whenthelumpispalpable andthe physician can easily
 hit the target with the needle. If the lesion is a simple
 cyst, the fluid will be evacuated and the mass will
 disappear. If it is solid, the diagnosis may be obtained.
 Care must be taken, however, because if the mass is
 solid and the specimen is non-malignant, a complete
 removal of the lesion may be appropriate to be sure.
 CORENEEDLEBIOPSY. Coreneedlebiopsiesalsoare
 obtainedsimplyunderlocalanesthesia.Thelargerpiece
 of tissue obtained with its preserved architecture may
 be helpful in confirming the diagnosis short of open
 surgical removal. An open surgical incisional biopsy is
 rarely needed for diagnosis because of the needle tech
niques. If there remains question as to diagnosis, a
 complete open surgical biopsy may be required.
 EXCISIONAL BIOPSY. When performed, the exci
sional (complete removal) biopsy is a minimal out
patient procedure often done under local anesthesia.
 NON-PALPABLE LESIONS. As screening increases,
 non-palpable lesions demonstrated only by mammo
graphy are becoming more common. Theuseofxrays
 and computers to guide the needle for biopsy or to
 place markers for the surgeon performing the exci
sional biopsy are commonly employed. Some benign
 lesions can be fully removed by multiple directed core
 biopsies. These techniques are very appealing because
 they are minimally invasive; however, the physician
 needs to be careful to obtain a good sample.
 Other tests
 If a lesion is not palpable and has simple cystic char
acteristics on mammography, ultrasound may be util
ized both to determine that it is a cyst and to guide its
 evacuation.Ultrasoundmayalsobeusedinsomecasesto
 guide fine needle or core biopsies of the breast.
 Computedtomography (CT)scans haveonly rare
 in the evaluation of breast lesions. Magnetic resonance  imaging (MRI) has been used more often in recent
 years to follow up on suspicious findings from mam
mograms or for certain patients.
 Treatment
 Staging
 Once diagnosis is established and before treatment
 is rendered, more tests are done to determine if the
 cancerhasspreadbeyondthebreast.Thesetestsinclude
 a chest x ray and blood count with liver function tests.
 Along with the liver function measured by the blood
 sample, the level of alkaline phosphatase, an enzyme
 from bone, is also determined. A radionuclear bone
 scan may be ordered. This test looks at the places in
 the bodytowhichbreastcancer usuallymetastasizes. A
 CT scan also may be ordered. The physician will do a
 careful examinationoftheaxillae toassesslikelihood of
 regional metastasis. Sometimes, the physician removed
 all of the axillary lymph nodes to assess breast cancer
 stage. However, recent studies show great success with
 sentinel lymph node biopsy. This technique removes the
 sentinel lymph node, or that lymph node that receives
 fluid drainage first from the area where the cancer is
 located. If this node is free of cancer, staging can be
 assigned accordingly. This method saves women the
 discomfort and side effects associated with removing
 additional lymph nodes in her armpit.
 Using the results of these studies, clinical stage is
 defined for the patient. This helps define treatment
 protocol and prognosis. After surgical treatment, the
 final, or pathologic, stage is defined as the true axillary
 lymph node status is known. Detailed staging criteria
 are available from the American Joint Commission
 on Cancer Manual and are generalized here:
 Stage 1—The cancer is no larger than 2 cm (0.8 in)
 and no cancer cells are found in the lymph nodes.
 Stage 2—The cancer is between 2 cm and 5 cm, and
 the cancer has spread to the lymph nodes.
 Stage 3A—Tumor is larger than 5 cm (2 in) or is
 smaller than 5 cm, but has spread to the lymph
 nodes, which have grown into each other.
 Stage 3B—Cancer has spread to tissues near the
 breast, (local invasion), or to lymph nodes inside
 the chest wall, along the breastbone.
 Stage 4—Cancerhasspreadtoskinandlymphnodes
 beyond the axilla or to other organs of the body.
 Treatment
 Surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy are all uti
lized in the treatment of breast cancer. Depending on
 the stage, they will be used in different combinations
 or sequences to effect an appropriate strategy for the
 type and stage of the disease being treated.
 SURGERY. Historically, surgical removal of the
 entire breast and axillary contents along with the mus
cles down to the chest wall was performed as the lone
 therapy, (radical mastectomy). In the last 25 years, as it
 has been appreciated that breast cancer often spreads
 early, surgery remains a primary option but other
 therapies have risen in importance. Recent studies
 have suggested that breast conserving treatment
 improves the quality of life.
 Today, surgical treatment is best thought of as a
 combination of removal of the primary tumor and
 staging of the axillary lymph nodes. A modified radi
cal mastectomy involves removing the whole breast
 along with the entire axillary contents but not the
 muscles of the chest wall.
 If the tumor is less than 1.5 (4 cm) in size and
 located so that it can be removed without destroying
 the reasonable cosmetic appearance of the residual
 breast, just the primary tumor and a rim of normal
 tissue will be removed. The axillary nodes will still be
 removed for staging purposes, usually through a sepa
rate incision. Because of the risk of recurrence in the
 remaining breast tissue, radiation therapy is used to
 lessen the chance of local recurrence. This type of
 primary therapy is known as lumpectomy, (or segmen
tal mastectomy), and axillary dissection.
 Sentinel lymph node biopsy, a technique for iden
tifying which nodes in the axilla drain the tumor, has
 been developed to provide selective sampling and
 further lessen the degree of surgical trauma the patient
 experiences.
 Whenpatientsareselected appropriately based on
 the preoperative clinical stage, all of these surgical
 approaches have been shown to produce similar
 results. In planning primary surgical therapy, it is
 imperative that the operation is tailored to fit the
 clinical circumstance of the patient.
 The pathologic stage is determined after surgical
 treatment absolutely defines the local parameters. In
 addition to stage, there are other tests that are very
 necessary to aid in decisions regarding treatment such
 as adjuvant therapies. Adjuvant therapies are treat
ments utilized after the primary treatment to help
 ensure that no microscopic disease exists and to help
 prolong patients’ survival time.
 RADIATION THERAPY. Like surgical therapy, radia
tion therapy is a local modality—it treats the tissue
 exposed to radiation and not the rest of the body. Radiationisusuallygivenpost-operativelyaftersurgical
 woundshavehealed.Thepathologicstageoftheprimary
 tumorisnowknownandthisaidsintreatmentplanning.
 The extent of the local surgery also influences the plan
ning. Radiation may not be needed at all after modified
 radical mastectomy for stage I disease, but is almost
 always utilized when breast-preserving surgery is per
formed. If the tumor was extensive or if multiple nodes
 were involved, the field of tissue exposed will vary
 accordingly. Radiation is utilized as an adjunct to surgi
cal therapy and is considered important to gaining local
 control of the tumor. The use of radiation therapy does
 not affect decisions for adjuvant treatment. In the past,
 radiation was used as an alternative to surgery on occa
sion. However, now that breast-preserving surgical pro
tocolshavebeendeveloped,primaryradiationtreatment
 of the tumor is no longer performed. Radiation also has
 an important role in the treatment of the patient with
 disseminated disease, particularly if it involves the skele
ton. Radiation therapy can affect pain control and pre
vention of fracture in this circumstance.
 DRUGTHERAPY. Manybreast cancers, particularly
 those originating in post-menopausal women, are
 responsive to hormones. These cancers have receptors
 on their cells for estrogen and progesterone. Part of
 primary tumor assessment after removal of the tumor
 is the evaluation for the presence of these estrogen and
 progesterone receptors. If they are present on the can
cer cells, altering the hormone status of the patient will
 inhibit tumor growth and have a positive impact on
 survival. The drug tamoxifen binds up these receptors
 on the cancer cells so that the hormones can’t have an
 effect and, in so doing, inhibits tumor growth. If the
 patient has these receptors present, tamoxifen is com
monlyprescribedforfiveyearsasanadjuncttoprimary
 treatment. Adjuvant hormonal therapy with tamoxifen
 has few side effects but they have to be kept in mind,
 particularly the needforyearlyevaluationof theuterus.
 Other agents directed at altering hormone environment
 are under study. Because of these agents, there is rarely
 any need for surgical removal of hormone-producing
 glands, such as the ovary or adrenal, that was some
times necessary in the past.
 In late 2003, cancer experts were beginning to
 recommend a new group of drugs called aromatase
 inhibitors (Arimidex, common name anastrozole, or
 more recently Femara and Novartis, common name
 letrozole). New guidelines also recommend letrozole
 following five years of tamoxifen therapy. These drugs
 fight breast cancer differently, but early research shows
 they fight it as effectively and with fewer side effects.
 Shortly after the modified radical mastectomy
 replaced the radical mastectomy as primary surgical
 treatment, survival after local treatment in stage II
 breast cancer was improved by the addition of che
motherapy. Adjuvant chemotherapy for an interval
 of four to six months is now standard treatment
 for patients with stage II disease. The addition of
 systemic therapy to local treatment in patients who
 have no evidence of disease is performed on the basis
 that some patients have metastases that are not cur
rently demonstrable because they are microscopic. By
 treating the whole patient early, before widespread
 disease is diagnosed, the adjuvant treatment improves
 survival rates from roughly 60% for stage II to about
 75% at five years after treatment. The standard regi
men of cytoxan, methotrexate, and 5-flourouracil,
 (CMF), is given for six months and is well tolerated.
 The regimen of cytoxan, adriamycin (doxorubicin),
 and 5-floururacil, (CAF), is a bit more toxic but only
 requires four months. (Adriamycin and cytoxin may
 also be used alone, without the fluorouracil.) The two
 methods are about equivalent in results. Adjuvant
 hormonal therapy may be added to the adjuvant che
motherapy as they work through different routes.
 The encouraging results from adjuvant therapy in
 stage II disease have led to the study of similar therapy
 in stage I disease. The results are not as dramatic, but
 they are real. Currently, stage I disease is divided into
 categories a, b, and c on the basis of tumor size. Stage
 Ia is less than a centimeter in diameter. Adjuvant
 hormonal or chemotherapy is now commonly recom
mendedforstageIbandIcpatients.Thetoxicityofthe
 treatment must be weighed individually for the patient
 as patients with stage I disease have a survivorship of
 over 80% without adjuvant chemotherapy.
 If patients are diagnosed with stage IV disease or,
 in spite of treatment, progress to a state of widespread
 disease, systemic chemotherapy is utilized in a more
 aggressive fashion. In addition to the adriamycin-con
taining regimens, the taxols (docetaxel and paclitaxel)
 have been found to be effective in inducing remission.
 On the basis of prognostic factors such as total
 number of involved nodes over 10, aneuploid DNA
 with a high synthesis value, or aggressive findings on
 microscopic evaluation, some patients with stage II or
 III disease can be predicted to do poorly. If their
 performance status allows, they can be considered for
 treatment with highly aggressive chemotherapy. The
 toxicity is such that bone marrow failure will result. To
 get around this anticipated side effect of the aggressive
 therapy, either the patients will be transplanted with
 their own stem cells, (the cells that will give rise to new
 marrow), or a traditional bone marrow transplantation
 will be required. This therapy can be a high-risk proce
dure for patients. It is given with known risk to patients  predicted to do poorly and only if it is felt they can
 tolerate it. Most patients who receive this therapy
 receive it as part of a clinical trial. At present, it is
 unclear that such aggressive therapy can be justified.
 For patients who are diagnosed with advanced
 local disease, surgery may be preceded with chemother
apyandradiationtherapy.The diseaselocally regresses
 allowing traditional surgical treatment to those who
 could not receive it otherwise. Chemotherapy and
 sometimes radiation therapy will continue after the
 surgery. The regimens of this type are referred to as
 neo-adjuvant therapy.Thishasbeenproventobeeffec
tive in stage III disease. Neo-adjuvant therapy is now
 being studied in patients with large tumors that are
 stage II in an effort to be able to offer breast preserva
tion to these patients.
 A drug known as Herceptin (trastuzumab), a
 monoclonal antibody, is now being used in the treat
ment of those with systemic disease. The product
 of the Human Epidermal Growth Factor 2 gene,
 (HER-2) is overexpressed in 25%–30% of breast can
cers. Herceptin binds to the HER-2 receptors on the
 cancer, resulting in the arrest of growth of these cells.
 Prognosis
 The prognosis for breast cancer depends on the
 type and stage of cancer. Over 80% of stage I patients
 are cured by current therapies. Stage II patients sur
vive overall about 70% of the time, those with more
 extensive lymph nodal involvement doing worse than
 those with disease confined to the breast. About 40%
 of stage III patients survive five years, and about 20%
 of stage IV patients do so. In 2003, research showed
 that young women who choose breast-conserving sur
gery are at higher risk for local recurrence and should
 receive indefinite follow-up care from their physicians.
 Prevention
 Theuse oftamoxifen andother agents which alter
 the hormonestatus of the patient are under study. The
 National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project
 (NSABP) with support from the National Cancer
 Institute began a study in 1992 (called the Breast
 Cancer Prevention Trial, or BCPT) studying the use
 of tamoxifen as a breast cancer preventative for high
risk women.Theresultsyieldedfromthestudyshowed
 that tamoxifen significantly reduced breast cancer
 risk, and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
 approved the use of tamoxifen to reduce breast cancer
 risk for high-risk patients in 1998. Another NSABP
 study, known as STAR, is seeking to understand if
 another drug, raloxifene, is as effective as tamoxifen in
 reducing breast cancer risk in high-risk patients. That
 study was begun in 1999, and participants were to be
 monitored for five years.
 And, while most breast cancer can’t be prevented,
 it can be diagnosed from a mammogram at an early
 stage whenitismosttreatable. The results of awareness
 and routine screening have allowed earlier diagnosis,
 which results in a better prognosis for those discovered.