Definition
 A breast self-examination (BSE) is an inspection
 by a woman of her breasts to detect breast cancer.
 Purpose
 ABSE is one of three tests the American Cancer
 Society recommends to help detect breast cancer in its
 earliest stages. By regularly examining her own
 breasts, a woman is more likely to find any changes
 that may have occurred. The best time to perform a
 BSE is about a week after a woman’s period ends,
 when her breasts are not tender or swollen. If her
 periods are not regular, a BSE should be completed
 on the same day every month. A BSE should also be
 regularly completed by women who are pregnant,
 breastfeeding, or have breast implants. By combining
 a BSE with a mammography and clinical breast  examination, a woman is offered the best opportunity
 for reducing chances of death from breast cancer
 through early detection. Close to 90% of breast can
cers are found through a BSE. The American Cancer
 Society recommends that beginning at the age of 20,
 women complete a BSE each month by feeling for
 lumps or anything suspicious, as well as looking at
 their breasts carefully in a mirror for any changes in
 contour, swelling, dimpling, puckering of the skin, or
 changes in the nipple.
 Description
 To complete a monthly BSE:
 When lying down, place a pillow under the right
 shoulder and position the right arm behind the
 head. Using the finger pads of the three middle fin
gers on the left hand, check the entire breast area.
 Usesmall circles and follow an up-and-down pattern
 while pressing firmly enough to know how the breast
 feels from month to month. This exam should then
 be repeated on the left breast using the finger pads of
 the right handwiththepillowundertheleftshoulder.
 When standing before a mirror, any changes in the
 shape or look of the breasts should be checked. In
 order to look for any skin or nipple changes such as
 dimpling ornippledischarge, the arms should first be
 placed at the sides and then overhead. Hands are
 then placed firmly on hips to flex chest muscles, and
 then the body should be bent forward.
 When taking a shower, the right arm should be
 raised. By using soapy hands and fingers flat the
 right breast and outer part of the breast can be
 examined. The same small circles and up-and-down
 pattern used when lying down should be used in an
 upright position. Repeat on the left breast.
 Preparation
 Before beginning a monthly BSE, a woman’s
 breasts should be completely exposed.
 Normal results
 Each woman’s breasts has their own normal look
 and feel. By completing a BSE each month, a woman
 can determine what is normal for her and check for
 changes that mayarise. Aregular pattern oflumpiness
 in the breasts is normal.
 Abnormal results
 If any changes are noticed during a monthly BSE,
 such as anew,hardlumpinthebreast orunderarms, a
 doctor should examine the area immediately. Other
 trouble signs that should not be ignored include:
 change in breast size or shape
 dimpling or puckering of the skin
 redness, swelling, or warmth that does not go away
 a pain in one area that does not vary with a woman’s
 monthly cycle
 a nipple that pulls in
 discharge from the nipple that begins suddenly and
 appears only in one breast
 one nipple that has an itchy, sore, or scaling area