 Definition
 Breast implantation is a surgical procedure for
 enlarging the breast. Breast-shaped sacks made of a
 silicone outer shell and filled with silicone gel or saline
 (salt water), called implants, are used.
 Purpose
 Breast implantation is usually performed to
 make normal breasts larger for cosmetic purposes.
 Sometimes a woman having a breast reconstruction
 after a mastectomy will need the opposite breast
 enlarged to make the breasts more symmetric.
 Breasts that are very unequal in size due to trauma
 or congenital deformity may also be corrected with an
 enlargement procedure.
 Precautions
 Awomanin poor health or with a severe chronic
 disease is not a good candidate for this procedure.
 Description
 A cosmetic breast enlargement is usually an out
patient procedure. It may be done under local or general anesthesia, depending on patient and physician
 preference. The incision is made through the armpit,
 under the breast, or around the areola (the darkened
 area around the nipple). These techniques create the
 most inconspicuous scars. The implant is placed
 between the breast tissue and underlying chest muscle,
 orunderthechestmuscle.Theoperationtakesapproxi
mately one to two hours. The cost of a cosmetic proce
dure is rarely covered by insurance. However, if
 enlargement is part of breast reconstruction after a
 mastectomy, health plans may pay for some or all of
 it. The surgeon’s fee ranges from $2,700-$4,200 and up.
 The procedure may also be called breast augmentation
 or augmentation mammaplasty.
 Preparation
 Before the surgery is performed, the woman
 should have a clear understanding of what her new  breasts will look like. She and her physician should
 agree about the desired final result. Many surgeons
 find it helpful to have the patient review before and
 after pictures, to clarify expectations.
 Aftercare
 Driving and normal activities may be restricted for
 uptooneweek.Stitchesareusuallyremovedinsevento
 10 days. Typically, a woman can resume all routines,
 including vigorous exercise, in about three weeks. The
 scars will be red for approximately one month, but will
 fade to their final appearance within one or two years.
 Risks
 Risks which are common to any surgical proce
dure include bleeding, infection, anesthesia reaction,
 or unexpected scarring. A breast enlargement may
 also result in decreased sensation in the breast, or
 interference with breast-feeding. Implants can also
 make it more difficult to read and interpret mammo
grams, possibly delaying breast cancer detection. Also,
 the implant itself can rupture and leak, or become
 displaced. A thick scar that normally forms around
 the implant, called a capsule, can become very hard.
 This is called capsular contracture, and may result in
 pain and/or an altered appearance of the breast. The
 older the implant, the greater the chances that these
 problems will occur.
 There has been intermittent publicity about pos
sible health risks from breast implants. Most concerns
 have focused on silicone gel-filled implants. As of
 1992, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
 restricted the use of this type of implant, and ordered
 further studies. Today only saline-filled implants are
 used for cosmetic breast surgery. Recent studies have
 shown no evidence long-term health risks from sili
coneimplants. However,research onthepossiblelinks
 between these implants and autoimmune or connec
tive tissue diseases is continuing.
 Normal results
 Breasts of expected size and appearance would be
 the normal results of this surgery.