 Definition
 Breast ultrasound (or sonography) is an imaging
 technique for diagnosing breast disease, such as can
cer. It uses harmless, high frequency sound waves to
 form an image (sonogram). The sound waves pass
 through the breast and bounce back or echo from
 various tissues to form a picture of the internal struc
tures. It is not invasive and involves no radiation.
 Purpose
 Breast ultrasound may be used in several ways.
 The most common application is to investigate a
 specific area of the breast where a problem is sus
pected. A palpable lump and/or a lump or density  discovered by x-ray imaging (mammogram) can be
 further evaluated by ultrasound. It is especially help
ful in distinguishing between a fluid-filled cyst and a
 solid mass. It also can identify small lesions that are
 tootinytobefelt.
 Breast ultrasound is often the first study per
formed to evaluate masses in women under 35 whose
 mammograms can be difficult to interpret due to
 the density of their breast tissue. In 2003, a new
 study found that ultrasound was more accurate than
 mammography at diagnosing breast cancer in women
 under age 45. However, mammography still works as
 a screening tool, with breast ultrasound as the follow
upexamination. Anotherstudyinthatyearfoundthat
 combining ultrasound with magnetic resonance ima
ging (MRI) direction greatly improved diagnostic
 decisions about breast cancer lesions. The lesions
 detected by MRI could also be localized using ultra
sound needle guidance for follow-up biopsy.
 The lack of radiation used with ultrasound makes
 it ideal for studying breast abnormalities in women
 who are pregnant. Assessing breast implants for leak
age or rupture is another use for ultrasound. Breast
 inflammation, where pockets of infection or abscesses
 may form, can be diagnosed and monitored by
 ultrasound.
 Thickened and swollen breast skin may be a sign
 of inflammatory breast cancer. Ultrasound can some
times identify a cancerous growth within the breast
 causing the thickened skin. These cases are usually
 followed by a core biopsy guided by ultrasound.
 Breast ultrasound is employed to observe and
 guide a needle for several interventional procedures.
 These include cyst aspiration, fine needle aspiration,
 large core needle biopsy (as a first step in determining  treatment for a lesion that is likely to be cancerous),
 and needle localization in surgical breast biopsy.
 Biopsies guided by ultrasound have distinct advan
tages. Patients usually find that the procedure is
 less traumatic and more comfortable than surgical
 biopsies. Ultrasound is known for its accuracy in
 determining how far a cancerous growth extends
 into the surrounding tissue in lesions that cannot be
 felt. Biopsies guided by ultrasound are generally less
 costly than surgical biopsies. Additionally, if the
 abnormality that requires biopsy can be seen on both
 a mammogram and ultrasound, an ultrasound-guided
 biopsy is often more comfortable for the patient as no
 compression is necessary. 
 Description
 Breech birth
 Ultrasound can be done in a doctor’s office or
 another outpatient setting, such as a hospital or ima
ging center.
 The patient removes her clothing from the waist
 up andputs onahospital gown, open in the front. She
 lies on her back or side on an examining table. A gel
 that enhances sound transmission is spread over the
 area to be examined. The technologist then places a
 transducer, an instrument about the size of an electric
 shaver, against the skin. The images from reflected
 sound waves appear on a monitor screen.
 A physician called a radiologist interprets the
 images obtained from ultrasound imaging. In 2003, it
 was reported that new computer-aided diagnosis
 (CAD) technology that had recently been widely
 added to mammography may help improve ultra
sound as well. The CAD system uses computer algo
rithms applied to a three-dimensional ultrasound
 image to assign scores to mass characteristics.
 Though the technology will not replace human obser
vation and judgment, it may soon be added tosupport
 the radiologist’s interpretation.
 A good ultrasound study is difficult to obtain if
 the patient is unable to remain quietly in one position.
 Obesity may hinder clear viewing of internal struc
tures, and the accuracy of an ultrasound study is
 highly dependent on the skill of the person performing
 the examination. The images recorded vary with the
 angle and pressure of the transducer and the equip
ment settings. The examination may take from 30 to
 45 minutes. Most insurance plans cover the cost of an
 ultrasound examination.
 Normal results
 Anultrasoundexaminationmayrevealeithernor
mal tissue or a benign condition such as a cyst.
 Ultrasound can confidently diagnose a benign struc
ture that has certain characteristics of a simple cyst. In
 the case of a simple cyst with no symptoms, additional
 treatmentbeyondcontinuedobservationisusuallynot
 needed.
 Abnormal results
 Apotentially malignant mass can be identified by
 breast ultrasound. Abnormal results fall into the fol
lowing categories: benign fibrous nodule, complex
 cyst, suspicious lesion, and lesion highly suggestive of
 cancer. In cases where ultrasound shows the presence
 of a complex cyst or fibrous nodule, a biopsy is
 justified because 10% to 15% of these growths are
 malignant. Lesions falling into the last two categories
 (suspicious or highly suggestive of cancer) have a
 higher chanceofbeingcancerous, andshouldbeinves
tigated further, either by biopsy or surgery.
 Breast cancers such as thefollowing maybeiden
tified on ultrasound: ductal carcinoma, infiltrating
 lobular carcinoma, medullary carcinoma, mucinous
 (colloid) carcinoma, tubular carcinoma, and papil
lary carcinoma. On ultrasound, the shape of a lesion
 and the type of edges it has can sometimes indicate if
 it is benign or cancerous, but there are exceptions.
 Forexample,benignfibroadenomasareusuallyoval,
 andsomecancerscanbesimilarly shaped. Cancerous
 tumors usually have jagged edges, but some benign
 growths can have these edges as well. Ultrasound is
 not a definitive test. Tissue diagnosis is often
 required.