 Definition
 Breech birth is the delivery of a fetus (unborn
 baby) hind end first. Between 3-4% of fetuses will
 start labor in the breech position, which is a poten
tially dangerous situation. 
 Description
 Throughout most of pregnancy, the developing
 fetus is completely free to move around within the
 uterus. Between 32-36 weeks, it becomes so large that
 movement is restricted. It is much harder for the fetus
 to turn over, so whatever position it has assumed by
 this point is likely to be the samepositionthatheorshe
 will be in when labor begins.
 For reasons that are not fully understood, almost
 all unbornbabiessettle into a headdownposition.The
 fetus is upside down in the uterus, and the head will
 lead the way during the birth process.
 Unfortunately, some fetuses do not cooperate.
 Most of these are in the breech position. The buttocks
 lead the way out of the uterus, and the legs are folded
 in front of the body (frank breech). Delivery from the
 breech position posesfarmorerisksthandeliveryhead
 first (vertex position).
 The biggest part of the fetus’s body is usually its
 head. If the head fits through the mother’s pelvis, then
 the rest of the fetus’s body should slip out fairly easily.
 If the fetus is born bottom first, it is possible that
 the body will fit through the mother’s pelvis, but the
 baby’s head will get stuck at the level of the chin. This
 condition, known as a trapped head, is very dangerous.
 When the baby’s head comes first, it has a chance
 to ‘‘mold’’ during labor. The bones of the baby’s skull
 are notyetfastened together the waytheyareinachild
 or adult’s skull, meaning that the bones of the baby’s
 skull can move. During the long hours of labor the
 skull can change shape to fit through the pelvis more
 easily, which is whymanybabiesarebornwitha‘‘cone
 head’’. If the baby is born from the breech position,
 the skull does not have a chance to change shape to fit
 the pelvis, and it is even more likely to get stuck.
 If the baby’s head gets trapped, the possibility of
 injury is high. Once the baby’s body is born, the umbi
lical cord usually stops pulsating (just as it would
 during a normal delivery). This cuts off the oxygen
 supply from the mothertothebaby. Ifthebaby’shead
 is still inside the uterus the baby cannot yet breathe on
 its own. Therefore, it is essential to deliver the baby as
 quickly as possible.
 Thelife saving attempts to deliver the baby’s head
 can cause injury to the baby’s neck orheadresulting in
 permanent handicaps. In extreme cases, if the baby
 cannot be delivered within a few minutes, the baby
 might die. Obviously, it is critical to avoid a breech
 delivery with a trapped head.
 Of course, many babies are safely delivered from
 the breech position. There are certain factors that
 make a breech delivery more likely to be successful: if
 ultrasound (a technique that uses sound waves to
 visualize the fetus) shows that the fetus is in the frank
 breech position, the fetus’s head is tucked on its chest,
 and the fetus is not big, it is less likely that its head will
 get stuck.
 Among breech babies born after the full nine
month term, smaller babies usually do better. This is
 not true for premature babies. Premature babies are
 morelikelytohaveatrappedheadbecausethebodyof
 a premature baby is usually much smaller than his or
 her head. Premature babies are generally not delivered
 from the breech position.
 The risks of vaginal breech delivery can be
 avoided by delivering the baby through a surgical
 procedure (cesarean section, also known as c-section).
 For the past twenty years, cesarean section has been
 recommendedwhenthefetus isbreech. Morerecently,
 many providers have offered the option of version,
 attempting to turn the fetus within the uterus to a
 head first position before labor begins.
 Version is based on a very simple idea. If a fetus in
 the breech position does a somersault, it will end up
 head down. During a version, the obstetrician tries to
 make the fetus do a somersault. 
  Aversion should only be done in a hospital, with
 an ultrasound machine used to guide the obstetrician
 in turning the fetus. The fetus should be monitored
 with afetal monitorbefore andafter theversion.Some
 obstetricians give the mother an injection of medica
tion to relax the mother’s uterus and prevent any
 contractions.
 During the procedure, the obstetrician places his
 or her hands on the mother’s abdomen to feel the
 location of the unborn baby’s buttocks and head.
 The buttocks are lifted up slightly and the doctor
 pushes on the baby’s head to encourage him to per
form a somersault. It may take several tries before the
 fetus cooperates, but over half will eventually turn.
 Aversion is not appropriate for every fetus who is
 in the breech position at the end of pregnancy. It can
 only be tried if there is one fetus in the uterus, if the
 placenta is not lying in front of the fetus, and if the
 umbilical cord does not appear to be wrapped around
 the fetus at any point.
 Causes and symptoms
 The cause of breech birth is not known. There are
 generally no identifiable symptoms. However, some
 women can tell the position of the fetus by where
 they feel the fetus kicking. Most women cannot tell
 what position the fetus is in at any given moment.
 Diagnosis
 Ahealth care provider can often tell the position
 of the fetus by feeling it through the wall of the
 mother’s abdomen. Another clue to the position is
 the location where the heartbeat is heard best. If the
 fetus’s heartbeat is best heard below the level of the
 mother’s navel, it is likely to be positioned head first.
 Ontheother hand, if the heartbeat is best heard above
 the level of the navel, it is likely to be breech.
 The only way to really be sure, however, is to do
 an ultrasound exam. Using this technique it is very
 easy to tell the position of the fetus.
 Treatment
 If a fetus is in the breech position in the last weeks
 of pregnancy, there are three possible courses of
 action: Cesarean section, attempted version, or vagi
nal breech delivery.
 Cesarean section is the most common way to deli
ver a breech baby. This surgical procedure carries
 more risk for the mother, but many women prefer to
 take the risk of surgery on themselves rather than let
 the baby face the risks of breech delivery.
 Version is gaining in popularity. Version is a med
ical procedure in which the obstetrician tries to turn
 the breech fetus to the head first position. Version is
 successful more than 50% of the time. However, some
 babies who are successfully turned will turn back to
 the breech position after the procedure is done.
 Somewomenchoosebreechvaginaldelivery. This
 should only be attempted if ultrasound shows that the
 fetus is in a favorable breech position. Most babies
 will do very well during a breech delivery, but it is
 always possible that the fetus will be injured, perhaps
 seriously.
 Prevention
 There is no way to prevent a fetus from settling
 into the breech position at the end of pregnancy. A
 woman who has had one breech fetus is more likely
 than average to have another.