 Definition
 Bronchodilators are medicines that help open the
 bronchial tubes (airways) of the lungs, allowing more
 air to flow through them.
 Purpose
 People with asthmahavetroublebreathing,because
 their airways are inflamed and become narrowed.
 Normally, air moves smoothly from the mouth and
 nose through the airways and into the tiny air sacs of
 the lungs as a person breathes in. Breathing out (exhal
ing) happens automatically when the person stops
 breathing in. In a person with asthma, breathing in
 (inhaling) is not a problem. Incoming air can slide
 around the blockage, because the act of breathing in
 makes the airways expand. The problem comes when
 the person with asthma tries to breathe out. The air can
 no longer get past the blockage, and it remains trapped
 in the lungs. The person can then only take shallow
 breaths. Bronchodilators work by relaxing the smooth
 muscles that line the airways. This makes the airways
 openwiderandallowsairtoleavethelungs.Thesedrugs
 also are used to relieve breathing problems associated
 with emphysema, chronic bronchitis, and other lung
 diseases.
 Description
 Some bronchodilators are inhaled, using a nebulizer
 or an inhalation aerosol. Others are taken as injections
 or by mouth. Most are available only by prescription,
 but a few, such as ephedrine, can be bought without
 a physician’s prescription. Examples of broncho
dilators are albuterol (Proventil, Ventolin), epinephrine
 (Primatene), ipratropium (Atrovent), metaproterenol
 (Alupent, Metaprel), and terbutaline (Brethine).
 Recommended dosage
 The recommended dosage depends on the type of
 bronchodilator and may be different for different
 patients. The physician who prescribed the drug or
 the pharmacist who filled the prescription can recom
mend correct dosage.
 Precautions
 Bronchodilators come with patient instructions
 that must be carefully read before using the medicine.
 If there is any confusion about how to use the medicine, patients should check with the physician or
 pharmacist. These medicines must be used exactly as
 directed. Taking larger than recommended doses or
 using the medicine too often can lead to serious side
 effects and even death.
 If symptoms do not improve or if they get worse
 after using a bronchodilator, the patient should call a
 physician right away.
 Although some bronchodilators are available
 without a physician’s prescription, these medicines
 should not be used unless a physician has diagnosed
 the patient’s condition as asthma.
 Research shows that frequent bronchodilator use
 over time can tighten airway muscles in some people.
 Some physicians advise patients to consider control
ling asthma with anti-inflammatory drugs including
 inhaled steroids such as beclomethasone dipropionate
 (Beclovent, Vanceril), flunisolide (AeroBid) or triamci
nolone acetonide (Azmacort). A 2004 Canadian study
 has questioneda standardpractice of increasing steroids
 after asthma attacks or worsened symptoms. Also,
 research in 2004 showed that people with asthma who
 worked closely with their physicians to self-manage
 their asthma had fewer attacks, which reduces the need
 for bronchodilators. Carefully managing asthma also
 reduces visits to the emergency department and
 hospitalizations.
 Persons with diabetes should be aware that the
 bronchodilator epinephrine may raise their blood
 sugar levels. 
  Patients who are using an aerosol bronchodilator
 and an aerosol form of either ipratropium or a corti
costeroid such as beclomethasone dipropionate
 (Beclovent, Vanceril) should use the bronchodilator
 first, then wait 5 minutes before using the other med
icine. A physician should be consulted before using
 any other inhaled medications or other asthma medi
cines. The physician must determine the proper
 amount of time between doses.
 Some bronchodilator products contain sulfites
 that trigger an allergic reaction in certain people.
 Anyone who has a sulfite allergy should read the
 label carefully or check with a physician or pharmacist
 before using a bronchodilator. Call a physician imme
diately if any of these signs of an allergic reaction to
 sulfite occur:
 bluish coloration of the skin
 flushed or red face or skin
 faintness
 severe dizziness
 increased wheezing or other breathing problems
 skin rash, hives,oritching
 swelling of the face, lips, or eyelids
 Special conditions
 People with certain medical conditions or who are
 taking certain other medicines can have problems if
 they use bronchodilators. Before using these drugs, a
 physician should be made aware of any of these
 conditions:
 ALLERGIES. Anyone who has had unusual reac
tions to any bronchodilator or an inhaled form of
 any other drug in the past should let his or her physi
cian know before taking the drugs again. The physi
cian should also be told about any allergies to foods,
 dyes, preservatives, or other substances.
 Patients who are allergic to soybeans, soy lecithin,
 peanuts, or drugs basedonatropineshouldnotusethe
 bronchodilator ipratropium (Atrovent).
 PREGNANCY. In studies of laboratory animals,
 some bronchodilators cause birth defects or miscar
riage when the animals are given doses many times
 the usual humandose.Whetherthesedrugscausesuch
 problems in humans in unknown. Any woman who is
 pregnant or plans to become pregnant should check
 with her physician before using a bronchodilator.
 BREASTFEEDING. Some bronchodilators pass into
 breast milk. Breastfeeding mothers should check with
 their physicians before using bronchodilators. 
 OTHER MEDICAL CONDITIONS. Before using bronchodilators, people with any of these medical
 problems should make sure their physicians are
 aware of their conditions:
 glaucoma
 brain damage
 convulsions (seizures)—recently or anytime in the
 past
 mental illness
 parkinson’s disease
 diabetes
 heart or blood vessel diseases
 rapid or irregular heartbeat
 high blood pressure
 overactive thyroid
 enlarged prostate
 obstruction of the neck of the bladder
 USE OF CERTAIN MEDICINES. Using bronchodila
tors with certain other drugs may affect the way the
 drugs work or may increase the chance of side effects.
 Side effects
 Some patients have a dry or irritated throat or a
 dry mouth after using bronchodilators. To help pre
vent these problems, gargling andrinsingthe mouthor
 taking a sip of water after each dose.
 The most common side effects are nervousness or
 restlessness and trembling. These problems usually go
 away as the body adjusts to the drug and do not
 require medical treatment. Less common side effects,
 such as bad taste in the mouth, coughing, dizziness or
 lightheadedness, drowsiness, headache, sweating, fast
 or pounding heartbeat, muscle cramps or twitches,
 nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, sleep problems and weak
ness also may occur anddonotneedmedicalattention
 unless they do not go away or they interfere with
 normal activities.
 More serious side effects are not common, but
 may occur. If any of the following side effects occur,
 the physician who prescribed the medicine should be
 contacted as soon as possible:
 chest pain or discomfort
 irregular or fluttery heartbeat
 unusual bruising
 hives or rash
 swelling 
 wheezing or other breathing problems
 numbness in the hands or feet
 blurred vision
 Other side effects are possible. Anyone who has
 unusual symptoms after using a bronchodilator
 should get in touch with his or her physician.
 Interactions
 Bronchodilators may interact with a number of
 other medicines. When this happens, the effects of one
 or both of the drugs may change or the risk of side
 effects may be greater. Anyone who takes these drugs
 should let the physician knowall othermedicines heor
 she is taking. Among the drugs that may interact with
 bronchodilators are:
 monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAO inhibitors)
 such as phenelzine (Nardil) and tranylcypromine
 (Parnate), used to treat depression
 other bronchodilators
 tricyclic antidepressants such as amitriptyline
 (Elavil) and imipramine (Tofranil)
 beta blockers such as propranolol (Inderal) and
 atenolol (Tenormin), used to control high blood
 pressure
 digitalis medicines, used to treat heart conditions,
 such as digoxin (Lanoxin)
 drugs, such as certain diuretics (water pills), that
 lower potassium levels
 ergoloid mesylates such as Hydergine, used to treat
 symptoms of Alzheimer’s disease or multiple small
 stokes
 ergotamine (Cafergot, Ergostat, and other brands),
 used to treat migraine and cluster headaches
 the antidepressant maprotiline (Ludiomil).
 The list above does not include every drug that
 may interact with bronchodilators. Be sure to check
 with a physician or pharmacist before combining
 bronchodilators with any other prescription or non
prescription (over-the-counter) medicine.