Definition
 Bronchitis is an inflammation of the air passages
 between the nose and the lungs, including the wind
pipe or trachea and the larger air tubes of the lung that
 bring air in from the trachea (bronchi). Bronchitis can
 either be ofbrief duration(acute) orhavealongcourse
 (chronic). Acute bronchitis is usually caused by a viral
 infection, but can also be caused by a bacterial infec
tion and can heal without complications. Chronic
 bronchitis is a sign of serious lung disease that may
 be slowed but cannot be cured.
 Description
 Although acute and chronic bronchitis are both
 inflammations of the air passages, their causes and
 treatments are different. Acute bronchitis is most pre
valent in winter. It usually follows a viral infection,
 such as a cold or the flu, and can be accompanied by
 a secondary bacterial infection. Acute bronchitis
 resolves within two weeks, although the cough may
 persist longer. Acute bronchitis, like any upper airway
 inflammatory process, can increase a person’s likeli
hood of developing pneumonia.
 Anyone can get acute bronchitis, but infants,
 young children, and the elderly are more likely to get
 the disease because people inthese age groups generally  have weaker immune systems. Smokers and people
 with heart or other lung diseases are also at higher
 risk ofdevelopingacutebronchitis.Individualsexposed
 to chemical fumes or high levels of air pollution also
 have a greater chance of developing acute bronchitis.
 Chronic bronchitis is a major cause of disability
 and death in the United States. The American Lung
 Association estimates that about 14 million Americans
 suffer fromthedisease.Likeacutebronchitis,chronic
 bronchitis is an inflammation of airways accom
panied by coughing and spitting up of phlegm. In
 chronic bronchitis, these symptoms are present for
 at least three months in each of two consecutive
 years.
 Chronicbronchitis iscausedbyinhalingbronchial
 irritants, especially cigarette smoke. Until recently,
 more men than women developed chronic bronchitis,
 but as the number of women who smoke has
 increased, so has their rate of chronic bronchitis.
 Because this disease progresses slowly, middle-aged
 and older people are more likely to be diagnosed
 with chronic bronchitis.
 Chronic bronchitis is one of a group of diseases
 that fall under the name chronic obstructive pulmon
ary disease (COPD). Other diseases in this category
 include emphysema and chronic asthmatic bronchitis.
 Chronic bronchitis may progress to emphysema, or
 both diseases may be present together. 
  Causes and symptoms
 Acute bronchitis
 Acute bronchitis usually begins with the symp
toms of a cold, such as a runny nose, sneezing, and
 dry cough. However, the cough soon becomes deep
 and painful. Coughing brings up a greenish yellow
 phlegm or sputum. These symptoms may be accom
panied by a fever of up to 102F (38.8C). Wheezing
 after coughing is common.
 In uncomplicated acute bronchitis, the fever and
 most other symptoms, except the cough, disappear
 after three to five days. Coughing may continue for
 several weeks. Acute bronchitis is often complicated
 by a bacterial infection, in which case the fever and a
 general feeling of illness persist. To be cured, the
 bacterial infection should be treated with antibiotics.
 Chronic bronchitis
 Chronic bronchitis is caused by inhaling respira
tory tract irritants. The most common irritant is
 cigarette smoke. The American Lung Association
 estimates that 80-90% of COPD cases are caused by
 smoking. Other irritants include chemical fumes, air
 pollution, and environmental irritants, such as mold
 or dust.
 Chronicbronchitis develops slowly over time. The
 cells that line the respiratory system contain fine, hair
like outgrowths from the cell called cilia. Normally,
 the cilia of many cells beat rhythmically to move
 mucus along the airways. When smoke or other irri
tants are inhaled, the cilia become paralyzed or snap
 off. When this occurs, the cilia are no longer able to
 move mucus, and the airways become inflamed, nar
rowed, and clogged. This leads to difficulty breathing
 and can progress to the life-threatening disease
 emphysema.
 Amildcough, sometimes called smokers’ cough, is
 usually the first visible sign of chronic bronchitis.
 Coughing brings up phlegm, although the amount var
ies considerably from person to person. Wheezing and
 shortness of breath may accompany the cough.
 Diagnostic tests show a decrease in lung function. As
 the disease advances, breathing becomes difficult and
 activity decreases. The body does not get enough oxy
gen, leading tochangesinthecompositionoftheblood.
 Diagnosis
 Initial diagnosis of bronchitis is based onobserving
 the patient’s symptoms and health history. The physi
cian will listen to the patient’s chest with a stethoscope
 for specific sounds that indicate lung inflammation,
 such as moist rales and crackling, and wheezing, that
 indicates airway narrowing. Moist rales is a bubbling
 sound heard with a stethoscope that is caused by fluid
 secretion in the bronchial tubes.
 Asputum culture may be performed, particularly
 if the sputum is green or has blood in it, to determine
 whether a bacterial infection is present and to identify
 the disease-causing organism so that an appropriate
 antibiotic can be selected. Normally, the patient will
 be asked to cough deeply, then spit the material that
 comes up from the lungs (sputum) into a cup. This
 sample is then grown in the laboratory to determine
 which organisms are present. The results are available
 in two to three days, except for tests for tuberculosis,
 which can take as long as two months.
 Occasionally, in diagnosing a chronic lung disor
der, the sample of sputum is collected using a proce
dure called a bronchoscopy. In this procedure, the
 patient is given a local anesthetic, and a tube is passed
 into the airways to collect a sputum sample.
 Apulmonary function test is important in diagnos
ing chronic bronchitis and other variations of COPD.
 This test uses an instrument called a spirometer to
 measure the volume of air entering and leaving the
 lungs. The test is done in the doctor’s office and is
 painless. It involves breathing into the spirometer
 mouthpiece either normally or forcefully. Volumes
 less than 80% of the normal values indicate an
 obstructive lung disease.
 Tobetter determine what type of obstructive lung
 disease a patient has, the doctor may do a chest x ray,
 electrocardiogram (ECG),andbloodtests.Anelectro
cardiogram is an instrument that is used to measure
 the electrical activity of the heart and is useful in the
 diagnosis of heart conditions. Other tests may be used
 to measure howeffectively oxygen and carbon dioxide
 are exchanged in the lungs.
 Treatment
 Acute bronchitis
 When no secondary infection is present, acute
 bronchitis is treated in the same way as the common
 cold. Home care includes drinking plenty of fluids,
 resting, not smoking, increasing moisture in the air
 with a cool mist humidifier, and taking acetaminophen
 (Datril, Tylenol, Panadol) for fever and pain. Aspirin
 should not be given to children because of its associa
tion with the serious illness, Reye’s syndrome.
 Expectorant cough medicines, unlike cough sup
pressants, do not stop the cough. Instead they are used to thin the mucus in the lungs, making it easier to
 cough up. This type of cough medicine may be helpful
 to individuals suffering from bronchitis. People who
 are unsure aboutwhattypeofmedications areinover
the-counter cough syrups should ask their pharmacist
 for an explanation.
 If a secondary bacterial infection is present, the
 infection is treated with an antibiotic. Patients need
 to take the entire amount of antibiotic prescribed.
 Stopping the antibiotic early can lead to a return of the
 infection. Tetracycline or ampicillin are often used to
 treat adults. Other possibilities include trimethoprim/
 sulfamethoxazole (Bactrim or Septra) and the newer
 erythromycin-like drugs, such as azithromycin
 (Zithromax) and clarithromycin (Biaxin). Children
 under age eight are usually given amoxicillin (Amoxil,
 Pentamox, Sumox, Trimox), because tetracycline disco
lors permanent teeth that have not yet come in.
 Chronic bronchitis
 The treatment of chronic bronchitis is complex
 and depends on the stage of chronic bronchitis and
 whether other health problems are present. Lifestyle
 changes, such as quitting smoking and avoiding sec
ondhand smoke or polluted air, are an important first
 step. Controlled exercise performed on a regular basis
 is also important.
 Drug therapy begins with bronchodilators.These
 drugs relax the muscles of the bronchial tubes and
 allow increased air flow. They can be taken by mouth
 or inhaled usinganebulizer. A nebulizer isa device that
 delivers a regulated flowofmedicationintotheairways.
 Common bronchodilators include albuterol (Ventolin,
 Proventil, Apo-Salvent) and metaproterenol (Alupent,
 Orciprenaline, Metaprel, Dey-Dose).
 Anti-inflammatory medications are added to
 reduce swelling of the airway tissue. Corticosteroids,
 such as prednisone, can be taken orally or intrave
nously. Other steroids are inhaled. Long-term steroid
 use can have serious side effects. Other drugs, such as
 ipratropium (Atrovent), are given to reduce the quan
tity of mucus produced.
 As the disease progresses, the patient may need
 supplemental oxygen. Complications of COPD are
 many and often require hospitalization in the latter
 stages of the disease.
 Alternative treatment
 Alternative practitioners focus on prevention by
 eating a healthy diet that strengthens the immune
 system and practicing stress management. Bronchitis
 can become serious if it progresses to pneumonia,
 therefore, antibiotics may be required. In addition,
 however, there are a multitude of botanical and herbal
 medicines that can be formulated to treat bronchitis.
 Some examples include inhaling eucalyptus or other
 essential oils in warm steam. Herbalists recommend a
 tea made of mullein (Verbascum thapsus), coltsfoot
 (Tussilago farfara), and anise seed (Pimpinella ani
sum). Homeopathic medicine and traditional Chinese
 medicine may also be very useful for bronchitis, and
 hydrotherapy can contribute to cleaning the chest and
 stimulating immune response.
 Prognosis
 Whentreated,acutebronchitisnormally resolves
 in one to two weeks without complications, although
 a cough may continue for several more weeks. The
 progression of chronic bronchitis, on the other hand,
 may be slowed, and an initial improvement in symp
toms may be achieved. Unfortunately, however,
 there is nocureforchronicbronchitis,andthedisease
 can often lead to or coexist with emphysema. Taken
 together, all forms of COPD are a leading cause of
 death.
 Prevention
 Thebestwaytopreventbronchitisisnotto begin
 smoking or to stop smoking. Smokers are ten times
 more likely to die of COPD than non-smokers.
 Smokers who stop show improvement in lung func
tion. Other preventative steps include avoiding
 chemical and environmental irritants, such as air
 pollution, and maintaining good overall health.
 Immunizations against certain types of pneumonia
 (as well as influenza) are an important preventative
 measure for anyone with lung or immune system
 diseases. 