 Definition
 Bronchoscopy is a procedure in which a cylindri
cal fiberoptic scope is inserted into the airways. This
 scope contains a viewing device that allows the visual
 examination of the lower airways.
 Purpose
 During a bronchoscopy, a physician can visually
 examine the lower airways, including the larynx, tra
chea, bronchi, and bronchioles. The procedure is used
 to examine the mucosal surface of the airways for
 abnormalities that might be associated with a variety
 of lung diseases. Its use includes the visualization of
 airway obstructions such as a tumor, or the collection
 of specimens for the diagnosis of cancer originating in
 the bronchi of the lungs (bronchogenic cancer). It can
 also be used to collect specimens for culture to diag
nose infectious diseases such as tuberculosis. The type
 of specimens collected can include sputum (composed
 of saliva and discharges from the respiratory pas
sages), tissue samples from the bronchior bronchioles,
 or cells collected from washing the lining of the
 bronchi or bronchioles. The instrument used in
 bronchoscopy,abronchoscope,isaslender cylindrical
 instrument containing a light and an eyepiece. There
 are two types of bronchoscopes, a rigid tube that is
 sometimes referred to as an open-tube or ventilating
 bronchoscope, and a more flexible fiberoptic tube.
 This tube contains four smaller passages—two for
 light to pass through, one for seeing through and one
 that can accommodate medical instruments that may
 be used for biopsy or suctioning, or that medication
 can be passed through.
 Bronchoscopy may be used for the following
 purposes:
 to diagnose cancer, tuberculosis, lung infection, or
 other lung disease
 to examine an inherited deformity of the lungs
 to remove a foreign body in the lungs, such as a
 mucus plug, tumor, or excessive secretions
 to remove tissue samples, also known as biopsy, to test
 for cancer cells, help with staging the advancement of
 the lung cancer, or to treat a tumor with laser therapy
 to allow examination of a suspected tumor, obstruc
tion, secretion, bleeding, or foreign body in the airways
 to determine the cause of a persistent cough, wheez
ing, or a cough that includes blood in the sputum
 to evaluate the effectiveness of lung cancer treatments
 Precautions
 Patients not breathing adequately on their own
 due to severe respiratory failure may require mechan
ical ventilation prior to bronchoscopy. It may not be
 appropriate to perform bronchoscopy on patients
 with an unstable heart condition. All patients must
 be constantly monitored while undergoing a broncho
scopysothatanyabnormalreactionscanbedealtwith
 immediately.
 Description
 Therearetwotypesofbronchoscopes,arigidtube
 and a fiberoptic tube. Because of its flexibility, the
 fiberoptic tube is usually preferred. However, if the
 purpose of the procedure is to remove a foreign body
 caught in the windpipe or lungs of a child, the more  rigid tube must be used because of its larger size. The
 patient will either lie face-up on his/her back or sit
 upright in a chair. Medication to decrease secretions,
 lessen anxiety, and relax the patient are often given
 prior to the procedure. While breathing through the
 nose, anesthesia is sprayed into the mouth or nose to
 numb it. It will take one to two minutes for the
 anesthesia to take effect. Once this happens, the
 bronchoscope will be put into the patient’s mouth or
 nose and moved down into the throat. While the
 bronchoscope is moving down the throat, additional
 anesthesia is put into the bronchoscope to numb the
 lower parts of the airways. Using the eyepiece, the
 physician then observes the trachea and bronchi, and
 the mucosal lining of these passageways, looking for
 any abnormalities that may be present.
 If the purpose of the bronchoscopy is to take
 tissue samples or biopsy, forceps or a bronchial
 brush are used to obtain cells. If the purpose is to
 identify an infectious agent, a bronchoalveolar lavage
 (BAL)canbeusedtogatherfluidforculturepurposes.
 Also, if any foreign matter is found in the airways, it
 can be removed.
 Another procedure using bronchoscopy is called
 fluorescence bronchoscopy. This can be used to detect
 precancerous cells present in the airways. By using a
 fluorescent light in the bronchoscope, precancerous tis
sue will appear dark red, while healthy tissue will appear
 green. This technique can help detect lung cancer at
 an early stage, so that treatment can be started early.
 Alternative procedures
 Dependinguponthepurposeofthebronchoscopy,
 alternatives might include a computed tomography
 scan (CT) or no procedure at all. Bronchoscopy is
 often performed to investigate an abnormality that  shows up on a chest x ray or CTscan. If the purpose is
 to obtain biopsy specimens, one option is to perform
 surgery, which carries greater risks. Another option is
 percutaneous (through the skin) biopsy guided by com
puted tomography.
 Preparation
 Thedoctorshouldbeinformedofanyallergiesand
 all the medications that the patient is currently taking.
 Thedoctormayinstructthe patient nottotake medica
tions like aspirin or anti-inflammatory drugs, which
 interfere with clotting, for a period of time prior to the
 procedure. The patient needs to fast for 6 to 12 hours
 prior to the procedure and refrain from drinking any
 liquids the day of the procedure. The bronchoscopy
 takes about 45to60minutes, withresults usually avail
able inoneday.Priortothebronchoscopy,severaltests
 maybedone, includingachestxrayandbloodwork.
 Sometimes a bronchoscopy is done under general
 anesthesia. Patients usually have an intravenous (IV)
 line in the arm. Most likely, the procedure will be done
 under local anesthesia, which is sprayed into the nose or
 mouth. This is necessary to decrease the gag reflex. A
 sedative may also be used to help the patient relax. It is
 important that the patient understands that at no time
 will the airway be blocked and that oxygen can be
 supplied through the bronchoscope. A signed consent
 form is necessary for this procedure.
 Aftercare
 After the bronchoscopy, the patient will be mon
itored for vital signs such as heart rate, blood pressure,
 and breathing, while resting in bed. Sometimes
 patients have an abnormal reaction to anesthesia. All
 saliva should be spit into a basin so that it can be
 examined for the presence of blood. If a biopsy was
 taken, the patient should not cough or clear the throat
 as this might dislodge any blood clot that has formed
 and cause bleeding. No food or drink should be con
sumedforabouttwohoursaftertheprocedureoruntil
 the anesthesia wears off. Diet is gradually progressed
 from ice chips and clear liquids to the patient’s regular
 diet. There will also be a temporary sore throat and
 hoarseness that may last for a few days.
 Risks
 Minor side effects arise from the bronchoscope
 causing abrasion of the lining of the airways. This
 results in some swelling and inflammation, as well as
 hoarseness caused from abrading the vocal cords. If
 this abrasion is more serious, it can lead to respiratory difficulty or bleeding of the airway lining. A more
 serious risk involved in having a bronchoscopy per
formed is the occurrence of a pneumothorax, due to
 puncturing of the lungs, which allows air to escape
 into the space between the lung and the chest wall.
 These risks are greater with the use of a rigid broncho
scope than with a fiberoptic bronchoscope. If a rigid
 tube is used, there is also a risk of chipped teeth.
 Normal results
 Normal tracheal appearance consists of smooth
 muscle with C-shaped rings of cartilage at regular
 intervals. The trachea and the bronchi are lined with
 a mucous membrane.
 Abnormal results
 Abnormal bronchoscopy findings may involve
 abnormalities of the bronchial wall such as  inflammation, swelling, ulceration, or anatomical
 abnormalities. The bronchoscopy may also reveal the
 presence of abnormal substances in the trachea and
 bronchi. If samples are taken, the results could indi
cate cancer, disease-causing agents or other lung dis
ease. Other abnormalities include constriction or
 narrowing (stenosis), compression, dilation of vessels,
 or abnormalbranchingofthebronchi.Abnormalsub
stances that might be found in the airways include
 blood, secretions, or mucousplugs. Anyabnormalities
 are discussed with the patient.