 Definition
 Bruxism is the habit of clenching and grinding the
 teeth. It most often occurs at night during sleep, but it
 may also occur during the day. It is an unconscious
 behavior, perhaps performed to release anxiety,
 aggression, or anger.
 Description
 Bruxism is one of the oldest disorders known, and
 approximately one in four adults experiences it. Most
 people are not aware of it before their teeth have been
 damaged.
 Causes and symptoms
 Whilebruxismistypicallyassociatedwithstress,it
 mayalso be triggered by abnormal occlusion (the way
 the upper and lower teeth fit together), or crooked or
 missing teeth.
 Symptoms of bruxism include: dull headaches;
 sore and tired facial muscles; earaches; sensitive
 teeth; and locking, popping, and clicking of the jaw.
 Duringadentalexamination, adentistmayrecog
nize damage resulting from bruxism, including:
 enamel loss from the chewing surfaces of teeth; flat
tened tooth surfaces; loosened teeth; and fractured
 teeth and fillings. Left untreated, bruxism may lead
 to tooth loss and jaw dysfunction. 
  Diagnosis
 Medical and dental histories and examinations
 are necessary to differentiate bruxism from other con
ditions that may cause similar pain, such as ear infec
tions, dental infections, and temporomandibular joint
 (TMJ) dysfunction. However, uncommonly worn
down teeth strongly suggest a diagnosis of bruxism.
 Treatment
 Topreventfurther damagetotheteeth,bruxismis
 treated by placing a removable, custom-fitted plastic
 appliance called a night guard between the upper and
 lower teeth. Although the clenching and grinding
 behavior maycontinue,theteethwearawaytheplastic
 instead of each other.
 Insomecases,abnormalocclusionmaybeadjusted
 and high spots removed so that the teeth fit together in
 a more comfortable position. Missing teeth may be
 replaced and crooked teeth may be straightened with
 orthodontic treatment to eliminate possible underlying
 causes of bruxism. In cases where jaw muscles are very
 tight, a dentist may prescribe muscle relaxants.
 Alternative treatment
 Stress management and behavior modification
 techniques may be useful to break the habit of  clenching and teeth grinding. Tight jaw muscles may
 be relaxed by applying warm compresses to the sides
 of the face. Herbal muscle relaxants also can be help
ful. Massage therapy and deep tissue realignment,
 including rolfing, can assist in releasing the clenching
 pattern. This is a more permanent alternative treat
ment for bruxism.
 Prognosis
 Bruxism may cause permanent damage to teeth
 and chronic jaw pain unless properly diagnosed and
 promptly treated. The behavior may be eliminated if
 its underlying causes are found and addressed.
 Prevention
 Increased awareness in patients prone to anxiety,
 aggression, or anger may prevent the habit of bruxism
 from developing.