 Definition
 Budd-Chiari syndrome is a rare problem that
 results from blood clotting in the veins flowing out of
 the liver (hepatic veins). The high pressure of blood in
 these veins leads to an enlarged liver, and to an accu
mulation of fluid in the abdomen, called ascites.
 Description
 The liver, the largest internal organ in the human
 body, is responsible for many vital physiologic pro
cesses. Blood flow through the liver nourishes the
 liver, carries in substances that the liver will process,
 and carries away substances that the liver has pro
duced. When blood cannot flow out freely from the
 liver, blood pressure rises in the veins of the liver,  leading to blood clots within the liver. Also, some
 of the blood plasma can leak through the walls of the
 veins and accumulate within the abdomen (ascites).
 Causes and symptoms
 The major symptoms include pain in the upper
 right-hand portion of the abdomen and a build-up of
 fluid in the abdomen. In the United States, blood
 disorders are the most common causes. Among these
 disorders are polycythemia vera (an increase in the
 number of red blood cells), and sickle cell anemia. In
 parts of the world where liver cancer is common, a
 form of liver cancer is the most frequent cause.
 Other causes sometimes include:
 certain infections
 use of oral contraceptives
 bodychangesinpregnancyandthepostpartum period
 phlebitis (inflammation of a vein)
 injury to the abdomen
 membranous webs (especially in Asia)
 Diagnosis
 Diagnosis of Budd-Chiari syndrome can be made
 by an internist (a specialist in diseases of the internal
 organs), a gastroenterologist (a specialist in the dis
eases of the digestive system), or a general surgeon. On
 physical examination, the doctor will note that the liver
 is larger than normal. Often an ultrasound scan of the
 liver will show abnormalities in the size of the liver, an
 abnormal pattern of the veins in the liver, and other
 abnormalities. A CT scan will often show similar
 abnormalities. 
  Once these abnormalities are confirmed, the key
 test is called hepatic vein catheterization. In this test, a
 narrow tube is snaked through the body until it
 reaches the hepatic veins. An instrument at the tip of
 the catheter can measure the pressure within each
 segment of the hepatic vein.
 In some cases, a tiny amount of radioactive mate
rial is injected into a patient, and then an abnormal
 pattern of radioactivity in the liver can be revealed.
 In other cases, a liver biopsy enables a physician to
 examine cells from the liver itself. Cells damaged by
 Budd-Chiari syndrome have a characteristic appear
ance easily identifiable to a physician.
 Treatment
 Surgery
 Most patients with Budd-Chiari syndrome must
 have surgery. A surgeon will re-route blood flow
 around the clotted hepatic vein into a large vein called
 the vena cava. The exact technique will depend on the
 specific location of the clots and other factors. In certain
 patients, other surgical techniques may be used. For
 patients who otherwise would have less than six months
 to live, liver transplantation is sometimes performed.
 In a few patients, a ‘‘balloon catheter’’ can open
 the blocked blood vessels, without the need for major
 surgery.
 Drugs
 Sometimes, anti-clotting drugs such as urokinase
 canbeusedforpatientswith asuddenonsetofclotting
 in the veins of the liver. These drugs do not seem to
 work when the clots have become established.
 Prognosis
 If surgery is done before permanent liver damage
 sets in, long-term survival is possible. In these cases,
 damagedlivercells can actually recover. If patients are
 already very sick with liver disease, the surgery may
 not be as helpful.
 Prevention
 The best approach to prevention is to carefully
 control the blood disorders that can lead to Budd
Chiari syndrome.