 Definition
 Bulimia nervosa is a serious and sometimes life
threatening eating disorder affecting mainly young  women. People with bulimia, known as bulimics,
 consume large amounts of food (binge) and then try
 to rid themselves of the food and calories (purge) by
 fasting, excessive exercise, vomiting, or using laxatives.
 The behavior often serves to reduce stress and relieve
 anxiety. Because bulimia results from an excessive
 concern with weight control and self-image, and is
 often accompanied by depression, it is also considered
 a psychiatric illness.
 Description
 Bulimia nervosa is a serious health problem for
 over two million adolescent girls and young women in
 the United States. The bingeing and purging activity
 associated with this disorder can cause severe damage,
 even death, although the risk of death is not as high as
 for anorexia nervosa, an eating disorder that leads to
 excessive weight loss.
 Binge eating may in rare instances cause the sto
mach to rupture. In the case of purging, heart failure
 can result due to loss of vital minerals such as potas
sium. Vomiting causes other serious problems, includ
ing acid-related scarring of the fingers (if used to induce
 vomiting)anddamagetotoothenamel.Inaddition,the
 tube that brings food from the mouth to the stomach
 (the esophagus) often becomes inflamed and salivary
 glandscanbecomeswollen.Irregularmenstrualperiods
 can also result, and interest in sex may diminish.
 Mostbulimicsfinditdifficulttostoptheirbehavior
 without professional help. Many typically recognize
 that the behavior is not normal, but feel out of control.
 Some bulimics struggle with other compulsive, risky  behaviors such as drug and alcohol abuse. Many also
 suffer from other psychiatric illnesses, including clin
ical depression, anxiety, and obsessive-compulsive dis
order (OCD).
 Most bulimics are females in their teens or early
 20s. Males account for only 5-10% of all cases. People
 of all races develop the disorder, but most of those
 diagnosed are white.
 Bulimic behavior is often carried out in secrecy,
 accompaniedbyfeelingsofguilt orshame. Outwardly,
 manypeoplewithbulimia appear healthy and success
ful, while inside they have feelings of helplessness and
 low self-esteem.
 Causes and symptoms
 Causes
 The cause of bulimia is unknown. Researchers
 believe that it may be caused by a combination of
 genetic and environmental factors. Bulimia tends to
 run in families. Research shows that certain brain
 chemicals, known as neurotransmitters, may function
 680
 abnormally in acutely ill bulimia patients. Scientists
 also believe there may be a link between bulimia and
 other psychiatric problems, such as depression and
 OCD. Environmental influences include participa
tion in work or sports that emphasize thinness, such
 as modeling, dancing, or gymnastics. Family pres
sures also may play a role. One study found that
 mothers who are extremely concerned about their
 daughters’ physical attractiveness and weight may
 help to cause bulimia. In addition, girls with eating
 disorders tend to have fathers and brothers who criti
cize their weight.
 Symptoms
 According to the American Anorexia/Bulimia
 Association, Inc., warning signs of bulimia include:
 eating large amounts of fooduncontrollably (bingeing)
 vomiting, abusing laxatives or diuretics, or engaging
 in fasting, dieting, or vigorous exercise (purging)
 preoccupation with body weight
 using the bathroom frequently after meals 
  depression or mood swings
 irregular menstrual periods
 onset of dental problems, swollen cheeks or glands,
 heartburn or bloating
 Diagnosis
 Bulimia is treated most successfully when diag
nosed early. But because the bulimic may deny there
 is a problem, getting medical help is often delayed. A
 complete physical examination in order to rule out
 other illnesses is the first step to diagnosis.
 According to the American Psychiatric Asso
ciation, a diagnosis of bulimia requires that a person
 have all of the following symptoms:
 recurrent episodes of binge eating (minimum average
 of two binge-eating episodes a week for at least three
 months)
 a feeling of lack of control over eating during the
 binges
 regular use of oneormoreofthefollowingtoprevent
 weight gain: self-induced vomiting, use of laxatives
 or diuretics, strict dieting or fasting, or vigorous
 exercise
 persistent over-concern with body shape and weight
 Treatment
 Early treatment is important otherwise bulimia
 may become chronic, with serious health conse
quences. A comprehensive treatment plan is called
 for in order to address the complex interaction of
 physical and psychological problems in bulimia. A
 combination of drug and behavioral therapies is com
monly used.
 Behavioral approaches include individual psy
chotherapy, group therapy, and family therapy.
 Cognitive-behavioral therapy, which teaches patients
 how to change abnormal thoughts and behavior, is
 also used. Nutrition counseling and self-help groups
 are often helpful.
 Antidepressants commonly used to treat bulimia
 include desipramine (Norpramin), imipramine
 (Tofranil), and fluoxetine (Prozac). These medications
 also may treat any co-existing depression.
 In addition to professional treatment, family sup
port plays an important role in helping the bulimic
 person. Encouragement and caring can provide the
 support needed to convince the sick person to get
 help, stay with treatment, or try again after a failure.
 Family members can help locate resources, such as
 eating disorder clinics in local hospitals or treatment
 programs in colleges designed for students.
 Alternative treatment
 Light therapy–exposure to bright, artificial light
may be useful in reducing bulimic episodes, especially
 during the dark winter months. Some feel that mas
sage may prove helpful, putting people in touch with
 the reality of their own bodies and correcting miscon
ceptions of body image. Hypnotherapy may help
 resolve unconscious issues that contribute to bulimic
 behavior.
 Prognosis
 Bulimia may become chronic and lead to serious
 health problems, including seizures, irregular heart
beat, and thin bones. In rare cases, it may be fatal.
 Timely therapy and medication can effectively
 manage the disorder and help the bulimic look for
ward to a normal, productive, and fulfilling life.
 Prevention
 There is no known method to prevent bulimia.