 Definition
 Bundle branch block (BBB) is a disruption in the
 normal flow of electrical pulses that drive the heart
 beat.
 Description
 Bundle branch block belongs to a group of heart
 problems called intraventricular conduction defects
 (IVCD). There are two bundle branches, right and
 left. The right bundle carries nerve impulses that
 cause contraction of the right ventricle (the lower
 chamber of the heart) and the left bundle carries
 nerve impulses that cause contraction of the left ven
tricle. The two bundles initially are together at a junc
tion called the bundle of His. Nerve impulses come
 through the sinus node of the heart to the bundle of
 His and then move into the right and left bundle
 branches. Bundle branch block is a slowing or inter
ruption of nerve impulses. A problem may exist in any
 of the three bundles.
 Patients with BBB are generally without symp
toms unless the disease is severe enough to cause a
 complete infranodal A-V block and very slow heart
 rate. In patients with right bundle branch block
 (RBBB), the nerve impulse is conducted slowly or not
 at all. The right ventricle finally receives the impulse
 through muscle-to-muscle spread, outside the regular
 nerve pathway. This mechanism of impulse transmis
sion is slow and results in a delayed contraction of the
 right ventricle. There are several types of left bundle
 branch block (LBBB), each producing its own charac
teristic mechanism of failure. In each case, the nerve
 impulse is blocked or delayed. Patients with LBBB
 may have left ventricular disease or cardiomyopathy.
 Causes and symptoms
 Left bundle branch block usually happens as a
 consequence of other diseases such as arteriosclerosis,
 rheumatic fever, congenital heart disease, myocarditis,
 myocardial infarction, metastatic heart tumors, or
 other invasions of the heart tissue. Right bundle branch
 block happens less often from underlying heart disease.
 Diagnosis
 Detection of BBB usually takes place during a
 normal physical examination. The block shows up as
 a widening of the second heart sound. Confirmation  of BBB is obtained by electrocardiogram (ECG).
 The pattern seen in the electrocardiogram indicates
 pulses in a heart beat and their duration. A QRS
 duration of greater than 110 milliseconds is a diagnos
tic indication of BBB. There is a unique ECG pattern
 for blocks in each of the three bundles.
 Treatment
 There is no specific therapy for BBB. Patients are
 usually treated for associated heart diseases.
 Prognosis
 The prognosis of blockage in any of the three
 bundle branches depends onthe prognosis of the asso
ciated heart disease. The associated diseases determine
 the outcome of the patient’s health. Occasionally,
 disruptions in bundle branches lead to complete infra
nodal A-V block, a more serious blockage of nerve
 impulses. Approximately 2% of patients with BBB
 develop infranodal A-V blockage and these patients
 often require artificial pacemakers.