 Definition
 Bursitis is the painful inflammation of the bursa,
 a padlike sac found in areas subject to friction.
 Bursae cushion the movement between the bones,
 tendons and muscles near the joints. Bursitis is most
 often causedbyrepetitive movementandisknownby
 several common names including weaver’s bottom,
 clergyman’s knee, and miner’s elbow, depending on
 the affected individual’s occupation and area of
 injury.
 Description
 There are over 150 bursae in the human body.
 Usually bursae are present from birth, but they may
 form in response to repeated pressure. Each sac con
tains a small amount of synovial fluid, a clear liquid
 that acts as a lubricant. Inflammation causes pain on
 movement.Themostcommonsiteforbursitistooccur
 is the shoulder (subdeltoid), but it also is seen in the
 elbows (olecranon), hips (trochanteric), knees, heels
 (Achilles), and toes. The affected area may be referred
 to as ‘‘frozen,’’ because movement is so limited. In the
 knee there are four bursae, and all can become
 inflamed with overuse.
 Causes and symptoms
 The most common cause of bursitis is repeated
 physical activity, but it can flare up for no known
 reason. It can also be caused by trauma, rheumatoid
 arthritis, gout, and acute or chronic infection.
 Pain and tenderness are common symptoms. If
 the affected joint is close to the skin, as with the
 shoulder, knee, elbow, or Achilles tendon, swelling
 and redness are seen and the area may feel warm to
 the touch. The bursae around the hip joint are deeper,
 andswelling is not obvious. Movement maybelimited
 and is painful. In the shoulder, it may be difficult to
 raise the arm out from the side of the body. Putting on
 a jacket or combing the hair becomes a troublesome
 activity.  In acute bursitis symptoms appear suddenly; with
 chronic bursitis, pain, tenderness, and limited move
ment reappear after exercise or strain.
 Diagnosis
 When a patient has pain in a joint, a careful phy
sical examination is needed to determine what type of
 movement is affected and if there is any swelling pre
sent. Bursitis will not show up on x-rays, although
 sometimes there are also calcium deposits in the joint
 that can be seen. Inserting a thin needle into the
 affected bursa and removing (aspirating) some of the
 synovial fluid for examination can confirm the diag
nosis. In most cases, the fluid will not be clear. It can
 be tested for the presence of microorganisms, which
 would indicate an infection, and crystals, which could
 indicate gout. In instances where the diagnosis is diffi
cult, a local anesthetic (a drug that numbs the area) is
 injected into the painful spot. If the discomfort stops
 temporarily, then bursitis is probably the correct
 diagnosis.
 Treatment
 Conservative treatment of bursitis is usually effec
tive. The application of heat, rest, and immobilization
 of the affected joint area is the first step. A sling can be
 used for a shoulder injury; a cane is helpful for hip
 problems. The patient can take nonsteroidal anti
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) like aspirin, ibuprofin,
 and naproxen. They can be obtained without a pre
scription and relieve the pain and inflammation. Once
 the pain decreases, exercises of the affected area can
 begin. If the nearby muscles have become weak
 because of the disease or prolonged immobility, then
 exercises to build strength and improve movement are
 best. A doctor or physical therapist can prescribe an
 effective regimen.
 If the bursitis is related to an inflammatory con
dition like arthritis or gout, then management of that
 disease is needed to control the bursitis.
 When bursitis does not respond to conservative
 treatment, an injection into the joint of a long-acting
 corticosteroid preparation, like prednisone, can
 bring immediate and lasting relief. A corticosteroid
 is a hormonal substance that is the most effective
 drug for reducing inflammation. The drug is mixed
 with a local anesthetic and works on the joint within
 five minutes. Usually one injection is all that is
 needed.
 Surgery to remove the damaged bursa may be
 performed in extreme cases.
 If the bursitis is caused by an infection, then
 additional treatment is needed. Septic bursitis is
 caused by the presence of a pus-forming organism,
 usually staphylococcus aureus. This is confirmed by
 examining a sample of the fluid in the bursa and
 requires treatment with antibiotics taken by mouth,
 injected into a muscle or into a vein (intravenously).
 The bursa will also need to be drained by needle
 twoorthreetimesoverthefirstweekof treatment.
 When a patient has such a serious infection, there
 may be underlying causes. There could be undis
covered diabetes, or an inefficient immune system
 caused by human immunodeficiency virus infection
 (HIV).
 Alternative treatment
 Alternative treatments take into consideration
 the role of diet in causing bursitis. The faulty use of
 calcium by the body, magnesium deficiency, and
 food allergies may have a role. Diet changes and
 vitamin supplements may be helpful. The use of
 herbs, homeopathy, aromatherapy, andhydrother
apy can help relieve symptoms. Ginger is useful in
 reducing inflammation. Acupuncture has been pro
veneffective in treating hip andshoulderpaincaused
 by bursitis and other conditions. Other therapies
 that deal effectively with musculoskeletal problems
 (relating to the muscles and skeleton), may also be
 helpful, such as body work, magnetic field therapy,
 naturopathic medicine, chiropractic, and applied
 kinesiology.
  Prognosis
 Bursitis usually responds well to treatment, but it
 maydevelop into achronic condition if the underlying
 cause is not corrected.
 Prevention
 Aggravating factors should be eliminated to pre
vent bursitis. Overexercising or the repetition of a
 movement that triggers the condition should be
 avoided. Doing exercises to strengthen the muscles
 aroundthe joint will also help. When doingrepetitive
 tasks, frequent breaks should be taken and the
 activity should be alternated with others using differ
ent parts of the body. To cushion the joints, it is a
 good idea to use cushioned chairs when sitting and
 foam kneeling pads for the knees. Leaning on the
 elbows, kneeling or sitting on a hard surface for a
 long period of time should be avoided. Not wearing
 high heels can help prevent bursitis in the heel, as can
 changing to new running shoes as soon as the old
 ones are worn out.