 Definition
 Byssinosis is a chronic, asthma-like narrowing of
 the airways. Also called brown lung disease, byssinosis
 results from inhaling particles of cotton, flax, hemp,
 or jute.
 Description
 Althoughinhaling cotton dust wasidentified as a
 source of respiratory disease more than 300 years
 ago, byssinosis has been recognized as an occupa
tional hazard for textile workers for less than 50
 years. More than 800,000 workers in the cotton,
 flax, and rope-making industries are exposed in the
 workplace to airborne particles that can cause  byssinosis. Only workers in mills that manufacture
 yarn, thread, or fabric have a significant risk of dying
 of this disease.
 In the United States, byssinosis is almost comple
tely limited to workers who handle unprocessed cot
ton. More than 35,000 textile workers have been
 disabled by byssinosis and 183 died between 1979
 and 1992. Most of the people whose deaths were due
 to byssinosis lived in the textile-producing regions of
 North and South Carolina.
 Causes and symptoms
 As many as 25% of workers with byssinosis have
 symptoms that continue or recur throughout the
 workweek. More severe breathing problems seem to
 result both from exposure to high levels of dust and
 from longer dust exposure. Workers who also smoke
 cigarettes suffer the most severe impairment.
 Diagnosis
 Tests that detect decreasing lung capacity during
 the workday are used to diagnose byssinosis.
 Obstructive patterns are likely in patients who have
 had recurrent symptoms for more than 10 years.
 Treatment
 Therapy for early-stage byssinosis focuses on
 reversing airway narrowing. Antihistamines may be
 prescribed to reduce tightness in the chest.
 Bronchodilators (drugs used to relax breathing pas
sages and improve air flow) may be used with an
 inhaler or taken in tablet form. Reducing exposure is
 essential. Any worker whohassymptomsofbyssinosis
 or whohastrouble breathing should transfer to a less
contaminated area.
 Prognosis
 Smoking, impaired lung function, and a history of
 respiratory allergy increase a textile worker’s risk of
 developing byssinosis. Prolonged exposure makes  patients wheeze more often and can cause chronic
 bronchitis. It does not lead to permanently disabling
 lung disease.
 Prevention
 Eliminating exposure to textile dust is the surest
 way to prevent byssinosis. Using exhaust hoods,
 improving ventilation, and employing wetting proce
dures are very successful methods of controlling dust
 levels to prevent byssinosis. Protective equipment
 required during certain procedures also prevents
 exposure to levels of contamination that exceed the
 current United States standard for cotton dust
 exposure.