Definition
Dacryocystitis is an inflammation of the tear sac
(lacrimal sac) at the inner corner of the eye.
Description
Tears drain into little openings (puncta) in the
inner corners of the eyelids. From there, the tears
travel through little tube-like structures (canaliculi)
to the lacrimal sac. The nasolacrimal ducts then take
the tears from the lacrimal sac to the nose. That’s why
people need to blow their nose when they cry a lot.
Dacryocystitis is usually caused by a blockage of
the nasolacrimal duct, which allows fluid to drain into
the nasal passages. When the lacrimal sac does not
drain, bacteria can grow in the trapped fluid. This
condition is most common in infants and people over
40 years old.
Causes and symptoms
In newborn infants, the nasolacrimal duct may
fail to form an opening–a condition called dacryostenosis. The cause of dacryocystitis in adults is usually
associated with inflammation and infection in the
nasal region. Dacryocystitis can be acute, having a
sudden onset, or it can be chronic, with symptoms
occurring over the course of weeks or months.
Symptoms of acute dacryocystitis can include pain,
redness, tearing, and swelling at the inner corner of
the eye by the nose. In chronic dacryocystitis, the eye
area may be swollen, watery or teary, and, when
pressure is applied to the area, there may be a discharge of pus or mucus through the punctum.
Diagnosis
Dacryocystitis usually occurs in only one eye. As
mentioned, the symptoms can range from watery eyes,
pain, swelling, and redness to a discharge of pus when
pressure is applied to the area between the bridge of
the nose and the inner eyelids. A sample of the pus may
be collected on a swab or in a tube for laboratory
analysis. The type of antibiotic and treatment may
depend on which bacteria is present. In the acute
form, a blood test may reveal an elevated white
blood cell (WBC) count; with a chronic infection, the
WBC count is usually normal. To identify the exact
location of the blockage, an x ray can be taken after a
dye is injected into the duct in a procedure called
dacryocystography.
Treatment
A warm compress applied to the area can help
relieve pain and promote drainage. Topical and oral
antibiotics may be prescribed if an infection is present.
Intravenous antibiotics may be needed if the infection
is severe. In some cases, a tiny tube (cannula) is
inserted into the tear duct which is then flushed with
a sterile salt water solution (sterile saline). If other
treatments fail to clear up the symptoms, surgery
(dacryocystorhinostomy) to drain the lacrimal sac
into the nasal cavity can be performed. In extreme
cases, the lacrimal sac will be removed completely.
In infants, gentle massage of the lacrimal sac four
times daily for up to nine months can drain the sac and
sometimes clear a blockage. As the infant grows, the
duct may open by itself. If the duct does not open, it
may need to be dilated with a minor surgical procedure.
Prognosis
Treatment of dacryocystitis with antibiotics is
usually successful in clearing the infection that is
present. If there is a permanent blockage that prevents
drainage, infection may recur and surgery may be
required to open the duct. If left untreated, the infected
sac can rupture, forming an open, draining sore.
Prevention
There are no specific recommendations for the
prevention of dacryocystitis, however, good hygiene
may decrease the chances of infection.