Definition
Debridement is the process of removing nonliving tissue from pressure ulcers, burns, and other
wounds.
Purpose
Debridement speeds the healing of pressure
ulcers, burns, and other wounds. Wounds that contain
non-living (necrotic) tissue take longer to heal. The
necrotic tissue may become colonized with bacteria,
producing an unpleasant odor. Though the wound is
not necessarily infected, the bacteria can cause inflammation and strain the body’s ability to fight infection.
Necrotic tissue may also hide pockets of pus called
abscesses. Abscesses can develop into a general infection that may lead to amputation or death.
Precautions
Not all wounds need debridement. Sometimes it is
better to leave a hardened crust of dead tissue, called
an eschar, than to remove it and create an open
wound, particularly if the crust is stable and the
wound is not inflamed. Before performing debridement, the physician will take a medical history with
attention to factors that might complicate healing,
such as medications being taken and smoking. The
physician will also note the cause of the wound and
the ways it has been treated. Some ulcers and other
wounds occur in places where blood flow is impaired,
for example, the foot ulcers that can accompany diabetes mellitus. In such cases, the physician or nurse
may decide not to debride the wound because blood
flow may be insufficient for proper healing.
Description
In debridement, dead tissue is removed so that the
remaining living tissue can adequately heal. Dead
tissue exposed to the air will form a hard black crust,
called an eschar. Deeper tissue will remain moist and
may appear white, or yellow and soft, or flimsy. The
four major debridement techniques are surgical,
mechanical, chemical, and autolytic.
Surgical debridement
Surgical debridement (also known as sharp debridement) uses a scalpel, scissors, or other instrument to
cut dead tissue from a wound. It is the quickest and
most efficient method of debridement. It is the preferred method if there is rapidly developing inflammation of the body’s connective tissues (cellulitis) or a
more generalized infection (sepsis) that has entered the
bloodstream. The procedure can be performed at a
patient’s bedside. If the target tissue is deep or close
to another organ, however, or if the patient is experiencing extreme pain, the procedure may be done in an
operating room. Surgical debridement is generally
performed by a physician, but in some areas of the
country an advance practice nurse or physician assistant may perform the procedure.
The physician will begin by flushing the area with a
saline (salt water) solution, and then will apply a topical
anesthetic gel to the edges of the wound to minimize
pain. Using a forceps to grip the dead tissue, the physician will cut it away bit by bit with a scalpel or scissors.
Sometimes it is necessary to leave some dead tissue
behind rather than disturb living tissue. The physician
may repeat the process again at another session.
Mechanical debridement
In mechanical debridement, a saline-moistened
dressing is allowed to dry overnight and adhere to
the dead tissue. When the dressing is removed, the
dead tissue is pulled away too. This process is one of
the oldest methods of debridement. It can be very
painful because the dressing can adhere to living as
well as nonliving tissue. Because mechanical debridement cannot select between good and bad tissue, it is
an unacceptable debridement method for clean
wounds where a new layer of healing cells is already
developing.
Chemical debridement
Chemical debridement makes use of certain
enzymes and other compounds to dissolve necrotic tissue. It is more selective than mechanical debridement.
In fact, the body makes its own enzyme, collagenase, to
break down collagen, one of the major building blocks
of skin. A pharmaceutical version of collagenase is
available and is highly effective as a debridement
agent. As with other debridement techniques, the area
first is flushed with saline. Any crust of dead tissue is
etched in a cross-hatched pattern to allow the enzyme to
penetrate. A topical antibiotic is also applied to prevent
introducing infection into the bloodstream. A moist
dressing is then placed over the wound.
Autolytic debridement
Autolytic debridement takes advantage of the
body’s own ability to dissolve dead tissue. The key to
the technique is keeping the wound moist, which can
be accomplished with a variety of dressings. These
dressings help to trap wound fluid that contains
growth factors, enzymes, and immune cells that promote wound healing. Autolytic debridement is more
selective than any other debridement method, but it
also takes the longest to work. It is inappropriate for
wounds that have become infected.
Preparation
The physician or nurse will begin by assessing the
need for debridement. The wound will be examined,
frequently by inserting a gloved finger into the wound
to estimate the depth of dead tissue and evaluate
whether it lies close to other organs, bone, or important body features. The area may be flushed with a
saline solution before debridement begins, and a topical anesthetic gel or injection may be applied if surgical
or mechanical debridement is being performed.
Aftercare
After surgical debridement, the wound will be
packed with a dry dressing for a day to control bleeding. Afterward, moist dressings are applied to promote
wound healing. Moist dressings are also used after
mechanical, chemical, and autolytic debridement.
Many factors contribute to wound healing, which frequently can take considerable time. Debridement may
need to be repeated.
Risks
It is possible that underlying tendons, blood vessels or other structures will be damaged during the
examination of the wound and during surgical debridement. Surface bacteria may also be introduced deeper
into the body, causing infection.
Normal results
Removal of dead tissue from pressure ulcers
and other wounds speeds healing. Although these
procedures cause some pain, they are generally well
tolerated by patients and can be managed more
aggressively. It is not uncommon to debride a wound
again in a subsequent session.