Definition
Defibrillation is a process in which an electronic
device sends an electric shock to the heart to stop an
extremely rapid, irregular heartbeat, and restore the
normal heart rhythm.
Purpose
Defibrillation is performed to correct lifethreatening fibrillations of the heart, which could
result in cardiac arrest. It should be performed immediately after identifying that the patient is experiencing a cardiac emergency, has no pulse, and is
unresponsive.
Precautions
Defibrillation should not be performed on a
patient who has a pulse or is alert, as this could cause
a lethal heart rhythm disturbance or cardiac arrest.
The paddles used in the procedure should not be
placed on a woman’s breasts or over a pacemaker.
Description
Fibrillations cause the heart to stop pumping
blood, leading to brain damage and/or cardiac
arrest. About 10% of the ability to restart the heart
is lost with every minute that the heart stays in fibrillation. Death can occur in minutes unless the normal
heart rhythm is restored through defibrillation.
Because immediate defibrillation is crucial to the
patient’s survival, the American Heart Association
has called for the integration of defibrillation into an
effective emergency cardiac care system. The system
should include early access, early cardiopulmonary
resuscitation, early defibrillation, and early advanced
cardiac care.
Defibrillators deliver a brief electric shock to the
heart, which enables the heart’s natural pacemaker to
regain control and establish a normal heart rhythm. The
defibrillator is an electronic device with electrocardiogram leads and paddles. During defibrillation, the paddles are placed on the patient’s chest, caregivers stand
back, and the electric shock is delivered. The patient’s
pulse and heart rhythm are continually monitored.
Medications to treat possible causes of the abnormal
heart rhythm may be administered. Defibrillation continues until the patient’s condition stabilizes or the procedure is ordered to be discontinued.
Early defibrillators, about the size and weight of a
car battery, were used primarily in ambulances and
hospitals. The American Heart Association now advocates public access defibrillation; this calls for placing
automated external defibrillators (AEDS) in police
vehicles, airplanes, and at public events, etc. The
AEDS are smaller, lighter, less expensive, and easier
to use than the early defibrillators. They are computerized to provide simple, verbal instructions to the
operator and to make it impossible to deliver a shock
to a patient whose heart is not fibrillating. The placement of AEDs is likely to expand to many public
locations.
Preparation
After help is called for, cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) is begun and continued until the caregivers
arrive and set up the defibrillator. Electrocardiogram
leads are attached to the patient’s chest. Gel or paste is
applied to the defibrillator paddles, or two gel pads are
placed on the patient’s chest. The caregivers verify lack
of a pulse, and select a charge.
Aftercare
After defibrillation, the patient’s cardiac status,
breathing, and vital signs are monitored until he or
she is stable. Typically, this monitoring takes place
after the patient has been removed to an intensive
care or cardiac care unit in a hospital. An electrocardiogram and chest x ray are taken. The patient’s skin is
cleansed to remove gel or paste, and, if necessary,
ointment is applied to burns. An intravenous line provides additional medication, as needed.
Risks
Skin burns from the defibrillator paddles are the
most common complication of defibrillation. Other
risks include injury to the heart muscle, abnormal
heart rhythms, and blood clots.