Definition
A delusion is an unshakable belief in something
untrue. These irrational beliefs defy normal reasoning,
and remain firm even when overwhelming proof is
presented to dispute them. Delusions are often accompanied by hallucinations and/or feelings of paranoia,
which act to strengthen confidence in the delusion.
Delusions are distinct from culturally or religiously
based beliefs that may be seen as untrue by outsiders.
Description
Delusions are a common symptom of several mood
and personality-related mental illnesses, including schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia, shared psychotic disorder, major depressive disorder, and bipolar disorder.
They are also the major feature of delusional disorder.
Individuals with delusional disorder suffer from longterm, complexdelusions that fallintooneof sixcategories:
persecutory, grandiose, jealousy, erotomanic, somatic, or
mixed. There are also delusional disorders such as dementia that clearly have organic or physical causes.
Persecutory
Individuals with persecutory delusional disorder
are plagued by feelings of paranoia and an irrational
yet unshakable belief that someone is plotting against
them, or out to harm them.
Grandiose
Individuals with grandiose delusional disorder
have an inflated sense of self-worth. Their delusions
center on their own importance, such as believing that
they have done or created something of extreme value
or have a special mission.
Jealousy
Jealous delusions are unjustified and irrational
beliefs that an individual’s spouse or significant other
has been unfaithful.
Erotomanic
Individuals with erotomanic delusional disorder
believe that another person, often a stranger, is in love
with them. The object of their affection is typically of a
higher social status, sometimes a celebrity. This type of
delusional disorder may lead to stalking or other
potentially dangerous behavior.
Somatic
Somatic delusions involve the belief that something is physically wrong with the individual. The
delusion may involve a medical condition or illness
or a perceived deformity. This condition differs from
hypochondriasis in that the deformity is perceived as a
fixed condition not a temporary illness.
Mixed
Mixed delusions are those characterized by two or
more of persecutory, grandiose, jealousy, erotomanic,
or somatic themes.
Causes and symptoms
Some studies have indicated that delusions may be
generated by abnormalities in the limbic system, the
portion of the brain on the inner edge of the cerebral
cortex that is believed to regulate emotions. The exact
source of delusions has not been conclusively found, but
potential causes include genetics, neurological
abnormalities, and changes in brain chemistry.
Delusions are also a known possible side effect of drug
use and abuse (e.g., amphetamines, cocaine, PCP).
Diagnosis
Patients with delusional symptoms should
undergo a thorough physical examination and patient
history to rule out possible organic causes (such as
dementia). If a psychological cause is suspected, a
mental health professional will typically conduct an
interview with the patient and administer one of several clinical inventories, or tests, to evaluate mental
status.
Treatment
Delusions that are symptomatic of delusional disorder should be treated by a psychologist and/or psychiatrist. Though antipsychotic drugs are often not
effective, antipsychotic medication such as thioridazine (Mellaril), haloperidol (Haldol), chlorpromazine
(Thorazine), clozapine (Clozaril), or risperidone
(Risperdal) may be prescribed, and cognitive therapy
or psychotherapy may be attempted.
If an underlying condition such as schizophrenia,
depression, or drug abuse is found to be triggering the
delusions, an appropriate course of medication and/or
psychosocial therapy is employed to treat the primary
disorder. The medication, typically, will include an
antipsychotic agent.
Prognosis
Delusional disorder is typically a chronic condition, but with appropriate treatment, a remission of
delusional symptoms occurs in up to 50% of patients.
However, because of their strong belief in the reality of
their delusions and a lack of insight into their condition, individuals with this disorder may never seek
treatment, or may be resistant to exploring their condition in psychotherapy.