Definition
Dementia is a loss of mental ability severe enough
to interfere with normal activities of daily living, lasting more than six months, not present since birth,
and not associated with a loss or alteration of
consciousness.
Description
Dementia is a group of symptoms caused by gradual death of brain cells. The loss of cognitive abilities
that occurs with dementia leads to impairments in
memory, reasoning, planning, and behavior. While
the overwhelming number of people with dementia
are elderly, it is not an inevitable part of aging.
Instead, dementia is caused by specific brain diseases.
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common cause,
followed by vascular or multi-infarct dementia.
The prevalence of dementia has been difficult to
determine, partly because of differences in definition
among different studies, and partly because there is
some normal decline in functional ability with age.
Dementia affects 5–8% of all people between ages 65
and 74, and up to 20% of those between 75 and 84.
Estimates for dementia in those 85 and over range
from 30–47%. Between two and four million
Americans have AD; that number is expected to
grow to as many as 14 million by the middle of the
twenty-first century as the population ages.
The cost of dementia can be considerable. While
most people with dementia are retired and do not
suffer income losses from their disease, the cost of
care often is enormous. Financial burdens include
lost wages for family caregivers, medical supplies and
drugs, and home modifications to ensure safety.
Nursing home care may cost several thousand dollars
a month or more. The psychological cost is not as
easily quantifiable but can be even more profound.
The person with dementia loses control of many of
the essential features of his life and personality, and
loved ones lose a family member even as they continue
to cope with the burdens of increasing dependence and
unpredictability.
Causes and symptoms
Causes
Dementia usually is caused by degeneration in the
cerebral cortex, the part of the brain responsible for
thoughts, memories, actions and personality. Death of
brain cells in this region leads to the cognitive impairment that characterizes dementia.
The most common cause of dementia is AD,
accounting for one-half to three-fourths of all cases.
The brain of a person with AD becomes clogged with
two abnormal structures, called neurofibrillary tangles and senile plaques. Neurofibrillary tangles are
twisted masses of protein fibers inside nerve cells, or
neurons. Senile plaques are composed of parts of neurons surrounding a group of proteins called beta-amyloid deposits. Why these structures develop is
unknown. Current research indicates possible roles
for inflammation, blood flow restriction, and toxic
molecular fragments known as free radicals. Several
genes have been associated with higher incidences of
AD, although the exact role of these genes still is
unknown.
Vascular dementia is estimated to cause from
5–30% of all dementias. It occurs from decrease in
blood flow to the brain, most commonly due to a series
of small strokes (multi-infarct dementia). Other cerebrovascular causes include: vasculitis from syphilis,
Lyme disease, or systemic lupus erythematosus; subdural hematoma; and subarachnoid hemorrhage.
Because of the usually sudden nature of its cause, the
symptoms of vascular dementia tend to begin more
abruptly than those of Alzheimer’s dementia.
Symptoms may progress stepwise with the occurrence
of new strokes. Unlike AD, the incidence of vascular
dementia is lower after age 75.
Other conditions that may cause dementia
include:
 AIDS
 Parkinson’s disease
 Lewy body disease
 Pick’s disease
 Huntington’s disease
 Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
 brain tumor
 hydrocephalus
 head trauma
 multiple sclerosis
 prolonged abuse of alcohol or other drugs
 vitamin deficiency: thiamin, niacin, or B12
 hypothyroidism
 hypercalcemia
Symptoms
Dementia is marked by a gradual impoverishment
of thought and other mental activities. Losses eventually affect virtually every aspect of mental life. The
slow progression of dementia is in contrast with delirium, which involves some of the same symptoms, but
has a very rapid onset and fluctuating course with
alteration in the level of consciousness. However,
delirium may occur with dementia, especially since
the person with dementia is more susceptible to the
delirium-inducing effects of may types of drugs.
Symptoms include:
 Memory losses. Memory loss usually is the first
symptom noticed. It may begin with misplacing valuables such as a wallet or car keys, then progress to
forgetting appointments, where the car was left, and
the route home, for instance. More profound losses
follow, such as forgetting the names and faces of
family members.
 Impaired abstraction and planning. The person with
dementia may lose the ability to perform familiar
tasks, to plan activities, and to draw simple conclusions from facts.
 Language and comprehension disturbances. The
person may be unable to understand instructions,
or follow the logic of moderately complex sentences.
Later, he or she may not understand his or her own
sentences, and have difficulty forming thoughts into
words.
 Poor judgment. The person may not recognize the
consequences of his or her actions or be able to
evaluate the appropriateness of behavior. Behavior
may become rude, overly friendly, or aggressive.
Personal hygiene may be ignored.
 Impaired orientation ability. The person may not be
able to identify the time of day, even from obvious
visual clues; or may not recognize his or her location,
even if familiar. This disability may stem partly from
losses of memory and partly from impaired
abstraction.
 Decreased attention and increased restlessness. This
may cause the person with dementia to begin an
activity and quickly lose interest, and to wander
frequently. Wandering may cause significant safety
problems, when combined with disorientation and
memory losses. The person may begin to cook something on the stove, then become distracted and wander away while it is cooking.
 Behavioral changes and psychosis. The person with
dementia may lose interest in once-pleasurable activities, and become more passive, depressed, or
anxious. Delusions, suspicion, paranoia, and hallucinations may occur later in the disease. Sleep disturbances may occur, including insomnia and sleep
interruptions.
Diagnosis
Since dementia usually progresses slowly, diagnosing it in its early stages can be difficult. However,
prompt intervention and treatment has been shown to
help slow the effects of dementia, so early diagnosis is
important. Several office visits over several months or
more may be needed. Diagnosis begins with a thorough physical exam and complete medical history,
usually including comments from family members or
caregivers. A family history of either AD or cerebrovascular disease may provide clues to the cause of
symptoms. Simple tests of mental function, including
word recall, object naming, and number-symbol
matching, are used to track changes in the person’s
cognitive ability.
Depression is common in the elderly and can be
mistaken for dementia; therefore, ruling out depression is an important part of the diagnosis.
Distinguishing dementia from the mild normal cognitive decline of advanced age also is critical. The medical history includes a complete listing of drugs being
taken, since a number of drugs can cause dementialike symptoms.
Determining the cause of dementia may require a
variety of medical tests, chosen to match the most
likely etiology. Cerebrovascular disease, hydrocephalus, and tumors may be diagnosed with x rays, CT or
MRI scans, and vascular imaging studies. Blood tests
may reveal nutritional deficiencies or hormone
imbalances.
Treatment
Treatment of dementia begins with treatment of
the underlying disease, where possible. The underlying
causes of nutritional, hormonal, tumor-caused and
drug-related dementias may be reversible to some
extent. Treatment for stroke-related dementia begins
by minimizing the risk of further strokes, through
smoking cessation, aspirin therapy, and treatment of
hypertension, for instance. No therapies can reverse
the progression of AD. Aspirin, estrogen, vitamin E,
and selegiline have been evaluated for their ability to
slow the rate of progression. However, none of these
have been proven effective. In fact, in 2002 and 2003,
research revealed that non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents (NSAIDs) did not help prevent AD and
dementia. In the same two years, the Women’s Health
Initiative, a large clinical trial, was halted because of
detrimental effects of combined estrogen and progestigin therapy, or hormone replacement therapy (HRT).
Not only was HRT found to increase risk of breast
cancer, stroke, and other heart disease, but the risk of
probable dementia was twice that for women taking
HRT than for those taking a placebo. Further, those
taking HRT had a substantial and clinically important
decline in indicators of cognitive ability. Studies still
debate the effects of vitamin E on slowing the progression of moderately severe AD.
Care for a person with dementia can be difficult
and complex. The patient must learn to cope with
functional and cognitive limitations, while family
members or other caregivers assume increasing
responsibility for the person’s physical needs. In progressive dementias such as AD, the person may ultimately become completely dependent. Education of
the patient and family early in the disease progression
can help them anticipate and plan for inevitable
changes.
Symptoms of dementia may be treated with a
combination of psychotherapy, environmental modifications, and medication. Drug therapy can be complicated by forgetfulness, especially if the prescribed
drug must be taken several times daily.
Behavioral approaches may be used to reduce the
frequency or severity of problem behaviors, such as
aggression or socially inappropriate conduct. Problem
behavior may be a reaction to frustration or overstimulation; understanding and modifying the situations that trigger it can be effective. Strategies may
include breaking down complex tasks, such as dressing
or feeding, into simpler steps, or reducing the amount
of activity in the environment to avoid confusion and
agitation. Pleasurable activities, such as crafts, games,
and music, can provide therapeutic stimulation and
improve mood.
Modifying the environment can increase safety
and comfort while decreasing agitation. Home modifications for safety include removal or lock-up of
hazards such as sharp knives, dangerous chemicals,
and tools. Child-proof latches or Dutch doors may
be used to limit access as well. Lowering the hot
water temperature to 120 8F (48.9 8C) or less reduces
the risk of scalding. Bed rails and bathroom safety
rails can be important safety measures, as well.
Confusion may be reduced with simpler decorative
schemes and presence of familiar objects. Covering
or disguising doors (with a mural, for example) may
reduce the tendency to wander. Positioning the bed in
view of the bathroom can decrease incontinence.
Two drugs, tacrine (Cognex) and donepezil
(Aricept), are commonly prescribed for AD. These
drugs inhibit the breakdown of acetylcholine in the
brain, prolonging its ability to conduct chemical messages between brain cells. They provide temporary
improvement in cognitive functions for some patients
with mild to moderate AD and help delay disease
progression.
Psychotic symptoms, including paranoia, delusions,
and hallucinations, may be treated with antipsychotic
drugs, such as haloperidol, chlorpromazine, risperidone, and clozapine. Side effects of these drugs can be
significant. Antianxiety drugs such as Valium may
improve behavioral symptoms, especially agitation and
anxiety, although BuSpar has fewer side effects. The
anticonvulsant carbamazepine also is sometimes prescribed for agitation. Depression is treated with antidepressants, usually beginning with selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) such as Prozac or Paxil,
followed by monoamine oxidase inhibitors or tricyclic
antidepressants. In general, medications should be
administered cautiously to demented patients, in the
lowest possible effective doses, to minimize side effects.
Supervision of taking medications is generally required.
Long-term institutional care may be needed for the
person with dementia, as profound cognitive losses
often precede death by a number of years. Early planning for the financial burden of nursing home care is
critical. Useful information about financial planning for
long-term care is available through the Alzheimer’s
Association.
Family members or others caring for a person
with dementia often are subject to extreme stress,
and may develop feelings of anger, resentment, guilt,
and hopelessness, in addition to the sorrow they feel
for their loved one and for themselves. Depression is
an extremely common consequence of being a fulltime caregiver for a person with dementia. Support
groups can be an important way to deal with the stress
of caregiving. The location and contact numbers for
caregiver support groups are available from the
Alzheimer’s Association; they may also be available
through a local social service agency or the patient’s
physician. Medical treatment for depression may be
an important adjunct to group support.
Alternative treatment
Several drugs are currently being tested for their
ability to slow the progress of AD. These include
acetyl-l-carnitine, which acts on the cellular energy
structures known as mitochondria; propentofylline,
which may aid circulation; milameline, which acts
similarly to tacrine and donezepil; and ginkgo extract.
Ginkgo extract, derived from theleavesof theGinkgo
biloba tree, interferes with a circulatory protein called
platelet activating factor. It also increases circulation
and oxygenation to the brain. Ginkgo extract has been
used for many years in China and is widely prescribed in
Europe for treatment of circulatory problems. A 1997
study of patients with dementia seemed to show that
gingko extract could improve their symptoms, though
the study was criticized for certain flaws in its method.
Prognosis
The prognosis for dementia depends on the underlying disease. On average, people with Alzheimer’s diseaselive eight years past their diagnosis,with a range from
one to 20 years. Vascular dementia usually is progressive,
with death from stroke, infection, or heart disease.
Prevention
There is no known way to prevent Alzheimer’s
disease, although several drugs under investigation
may reduce its risk or slow its progression. The risk
of developing multi-infarct dementia may be reduced
by reducing the risk of stroke. Various studies
continue to determine ways to lower risk of AD and
dementia. For example, a 2003 study in the New
England Journal of Medicine reported that people
over age 75 who participated in leisure activities such
as playing board games, reading, dancing, and playing
musical instruments were less likely to have dementia
after five years than others their age.