Definition
Dengue fever is a disease caused by one of a number of viruses that are carried by mosquitoes. These
mosquitoes then transmit the virus to humans.
Description
The virus that causes dengue fever is called an
arbovirus, which stands for arthropod-borne virus.
Mosquitoes are a type of arthropod. In a number of
regions, mosquitoes carry this virus and are responsible for passing it along to humans. These regions
include the Middle East, the far East, Africa, and the
Caribbean Islands. In these locations, the dengue fever
arbovirus is endemic, meaning that the virus naturally
and consistently lives in that location. The disease only
shows up in the United States sporadically.
In order to understand how dengue fever is transmitted, several terms need to be defined. The word
‘‘host’’ means an animal (including a human) that
can be infected with a particular disease. The word
‘‘vector’’ means an organism that can carry a particular disease-causing agent (like a virus or bacteria)
without actually developing the disease. The vector
can then pass the virus or bacteria on to a new host.
Many of the common illnesses in the United
States (including the common cold, many viral causes
of diarrhea, and influenza or ‘‘flu’’) are spread because
the viruses that cause these illness can be passed
directly from person to person. However, dengue
fever cannot be passed directly from one infected person to another. Instead, the virus responsible for dengue fever requires an intermediate vector, a mosquito,
that carries the virus from one host to another. The
mosquito that carries the arbovirus responsible for
dengue fever is the same type of mosquito that can
transmit other diseases, including yellow fever. This
mosquito is called Aedes egypti. The most common
victims are children younger than 10 years of age.
Causes and symptoms
Dengue fever can occur when a mosquito carrying
the arbovirus bites a human, passing the virus on to
the new host. Once in the body, the virus travels to
various glands where it multiplies. The virus can then
enter the bloodstream. The presence of the virus
within the blood vessels, especially those feeding the
skin, causes changes to these blood vessels. The vessels
swell and leak. The spleen and lymph nodes become
enlarged, and patches of liver tissue die. A process
called disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
occurs, where chemicals responsible for clotting are
used up and lead to a risk of severe bleeding
(hemorrhage).
After the virus has been transmitted to the human
host, a period of incubation occurs. During this time
(lasting about five to eight days) the virus multiplies.
Symptoms of the disease appear suddenly and include
high fever, chills, headache, eye pain, red eyes, enlarged
lymph nodes, a red flush to the face, lower back pain,
extreme weakness, and severe achesin thelegs andjoints.
This initial period of illness lasts about two or
three days. After this time, the fever drops rapidly
and the patient sweats heavily. After about a day of
feeling relatively well, the patient’s temperature
increases again, although not as much as the first
time. A rash of small red bumps begins on the arms
and legs, spreading to the chest, abdomen, and back.
It rarely affects the face. The palms of the hands and
the soles of the feet become swollen and turn bright
red. The characteristic combination of fever, rash, and
headache are called the ‘‘dengue triad.’’ Most people
recover fully from dengue fever, although weakness
and fatigue may last for several weeks. Once a person
has been infected with dengue fever, his or her immune
system keeps producing cells that prevent reinfection
for about a year.
More severe illness may occur in some people.
These people may be experiencing dengue fever for
the first time. However, in some cases a person may
have already had dengue fever at one time, recovered,
and then is reinfected with the virus. In these cases, the
first infection teaches the immune system to recognize
the presence of the arbovirus. When the immune cells
encounter the virus during later infections, the
immune system over-reacts. These types of illnesses,
called dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) or dengue
shock syndrome (DSS), involve more severe symptoms. Fever and headache are the first symptoms,
but the other initial symptoms of dengue fever are
absent. The patient develops a cough, followed by the
appearance of small purplish spots (petechiae) on the
skin. These petechiae are areas where blood is leaking
out of the vessels. Large bruised areas appear as the
bleeding worsens and abdominal pain may be severe.
The patient may begin to vomit a substance that looks
like coffee grounds. This is actually a sign of bleeding
into the stomach. As the blood vessels become more
damaged, they leak more and continue to increase in
diameter (dilate), causing a decrease in blood flow to
all tissues of the body. This state of low blood flow is
called shock. Shock can result in damage to the body’s
organs (especially the heart and kidneys) because low
blood flow deprives them of oxygen.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis should be suspected in endemic areas
whenever a high fever goes on for two to seven days,
especially if accompanied by a bleeding tendency.
Symptoms of shock should suggest the progression
of the disease to DSS.
The arbovirus causing dengue fever is one of the
few types of arbovirus that can be isolated from the
serum of the blood. The serum is the fluid in which
blood cells are suspended. Serum can be tested because
the phase in which the virus travels throughout the
bloodstream is longer in dengue fever than in other
arboviral infections. A number of tests are used to
look for reactions between the patient’s serum and
laboratory-produced antibodies. Antibodies are special
cells that recognize the markers (or antigens) present on
invading organisms. During these tests, antibodies are
added to a sample of the patient’s serum. Healthcare
workers then look for reactions that would only occur if
viral antigens were present in that serum.
Treatment
There is no treatment available to shorten the
course of dengue fever, DHF, or DSS. Medications
can be given to lower the fever and to decrease the pain
of muscle aches and headaches. Fluids are given
through a needle in a vein to prevent dehydration.
Blood transfusions may be necessary if severe hemorrhaging occurs. Oxygen should be administered to
patients in shock.
Prognosis
The prognosis for uncomplicated dengue fever is
very good, and almost 100% of patients fully recover.
However, as many as 6–30% of all patients die when
DHF occurs. The death rate is especially high among
the youngest patients (under one year old). In places
where excellent medical care is available, very close
monitoring and immediate treatment of complications
lowers the death rate among DHF and DSS patients to
about 1%.
Prevention
Prevention of dengue fever means decreasing the
mosquito population. Any sources of standing water
(buckets, vases, etc.) where the mosquitoes can breed
must be eliminated. Mosquito repellant is recommended for those areas where dengue fever is endemic.
To help break the cycle of transmission, sick patients
should be placed in bed nets so that mosquitoes cannot
bite them and become arboviral vectors.