Definition
Dental trauma is injury to the mouth, including
teeth, lips, gums, tongue, and jawbones. The most
common dental trauma is a broken or lost tooth.
Description
Dental trauma may be inflicted in a number of
ways: contact sports, motor vehicle accidents, fights,
falls, eating hard foods, drinking hot liquids, and
other such mishaps. As oral tissues are highly sensitive, injuries to the mouth are typically very painful.
Dental trauma should receive prompt treatment from
a dentist.
Causes and symptoms
Soft tissue injuries, such as a ‘‘fat lip,’’ a burned
tongue, or a cut inside the cheek, are characterized by
pain, redness, and swelling with or without bleeding. A
broken tooth often has a sharp edge that may cut the
tongue and cheek. Depending on the position of the
fracture, the tooth may or may not cause toothache
pain. When a tooth is knocked out (evulsed), the socket
is swollen, painful, and bloody. A jawbone may be
broken if the upper and lower teeth no longer fit
together properly (malocclusion), or if the jaws have
pain with limited ability to open and close (mobility),
especially around the temporomandibular joint (TMJ).
Diagnosis
Dental trauma is readily apparent upon examination. Dental x rays may be taken to determine the
extent of the damage to broken teeth. More comprehensive x rays are needed to diagnose a broken jaw.
Treatment
Soft tissue injuriesmay require only cold compresses
to reduce swelling. Bleeding may be controlled with
direct pressure applied with clean gauze. Deep lacerations and punctures may require stitches. Pain may be
managed with aspirin or acetaminophen (Tylenol,
Aspirin Free Excedrin) or ibuprofen (Motrin, Advil).
Treatment of a broken tooth will vary depending
on the severity of the fracture. For immediate first aid,
the injured tooth and surrounding area should be
rinsed gently with warm water to remove dirt, then
covered with a cold compress to reduce swelling and
ease pain. A dentist should examine the injury as soon
as possible. Any pieces from the broken tooth should
be saved and brought along.
If a piece of the outer tooth has chipped off, but
the inner core (pulp) is undisturbed, the dentist may
simply smooth the rough edges or replace the missing
section with a small composite filling. In some cases, a
fragment of broken tooth may be bonded back into
place. If enough tooth is missing to compromise the
entire tooth structure, but the pulp is not permanently
damaged, the tooth will require a protective coverage
with a gold or porcelain crown. If the pulp has been
seriously damaged, the tooth will require root canal
treatment before it receives a crown. A tooth, that is
vertically fractured or fractured below the gumline will
require root canal treatment and protective restoration. A tooth that no longer has enough remaining
structure to retain a crown may have to be extracted
(surgically removed).
When a permanent tooth has been knocked out, it
may be saved with prompt action. The tooth must be
found immediately after it has been lost. It should be
picked up by the natural crown (the top part covered by
hard enamel). It must not be handled by the root. If the
tooth is dirty, it may be gently rinsed under running
water. It should never be scrubbed, and it should never
be washed with soap, toothpaste, mouthwash, or other
chemicals. The tooth should not be dried or wrapped in
a tissue or cloth. It must be kept moist at all times.
The tooth may be placed in a clean container of
milk, cool water with or without a pinch of salt, or in
saliva. If possible, the patient and the tooth should be
brought to the dentist within 30 minutes of the tooth
loss. Rapid action improves the chances of successful
re-implantation; however, it is possible to save a tooth
after 30 minutes, if the tooth has been kept moist and
handled properly.
The body usually rejects re-implantation of a primary (baby) tooth. In this case, the empty socket is
treated as a soft tissue injury and monitored until the
permanent tooth erupts.
A broken jaw must be set back into its proper
position and stabilized with wires while it heals.
Healing may take six weeks or longer, depending on
the patient’s age and the severity of the fracture.
Alternative treatment
There is no substitute for treatment by a dentist or
other medical professional. There are, however,
homeopathic remedies and herbs that can be used
simultaneously with dental care and throughout the
healing process. Homeopathic arnica (Arnica montana) should be taken as soon as possible after the
injury to help the body deal with the trauma.
Repeating a dose several times daily for the duration
of healing is also useful. Homeopathic hypericum
(Hypericum perforatum) can be taken if nerve pain is
involved, especially with a tooth extraction or root
canal. Homeopathic comfrey (officinale) Symphytum
may be helpful in treating pain due to broken jaw
bones, but should only be used after the bones have
been reset. Calendula (Calendula officinalis) and plantain (Plantago major) can be used as a mouth rinse to
enhance tissue healing. These herbs should not be
used with deep lacerations that need to heal from the
inside first.
Prognosis
When dental trauma receives timely attention and
proper treatment, the prognosis for healing is good. As
with other types of trauma, infection may be a complication, but a course of antibiotics is generally effective.
Prevention
Most dental trauma is preventable. Car seat belts
should always be worn, and young children should be
secured in appropriate car seats. Homes should be
monitored for potential tripping and slipping hazards.
Child-proofing measures should be taken, especially
for toddlers. In addition to placing gates across stairs
and padding sharp table edges, electrical cords should
be tucked away. Young children may receive severe
oral burns from gnawing on live power cords.
Everyone who participates in contact sports
should wear a mouthguard to avoid dental trauma.
Athletes in football, ice hockey, wrestling, and boxing
commonly wear mouthguards. The mandatory use of
mouthguards in football prevents about 200,000 oral
injuries annually. Mouthguards should also be worn
along with helmets in noncontact sports such as skateboarding, in-line skating, and bicycling. An athlete
who does not wear a mouthguard is 60 times more
likely to sustain dental trauma than one who does.
Any activity involving speed, an increased chance of
falling, and potential contact with a hard piece of
equipment has the likelihood of dental trauma that
may be prevented or substantially reduced in severity
with the use of mouthguards.