Definition
Norplant is a long-acting hormone that is inserted
under the skin and prevents conception for up to five
years. Depo-Provera is also a hormone, but is administered by intramuscular injection and provides protection against pregnancy for three months. Lunelle is
another injectable contraceptive that is administered
monthly (every 28 to 30 days); it was approved by the
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in October2000. The hormone in Norplant and Depo-Provera is
progestin, a synthetic hormone similar to one found
naturally in a woman’s body; Lunelle contains the
hormones progestin and estrogen.
Purpose
The purpose of these hormones is to prevent pregnancy; they are about 99% effective in achieving this
goal. No hormonal contraceptive methods provide
protection from AIDS or other sexually transmitted
diseases.
Depo-Provera and Lunelle are given as an injection and work in several ways to prevent conception.
First, the egg (ovum) is prevented from maturing and
being released. The mucus in the cervix (opening into the uterus or womb) becomes thicker, making it difficult for the sperm to enter. Depo-Provera and Lunelle
also cause the lining of the uterus to become thinner,
making implantation of a fertilized egg unlikely.
An injection of Depo-Provera or Lunelle must be
given within the first five days of a normal period.
Depo-Provera provides protection against pregnancy
for three months, while Lunelle provides similar protection for one month. Ovulation (release of a mature
egg) typically occurs within 60 days of the last injection of Lunelle, about twice as fast after use of DepoProvera. Also, because Lunelle is a combined
hormone contraceptive as opposed to progestin-only
Depo-Provera and Norplant, it is less likely to cause
irregular or absent menstruation.
Norplant capsules contain a synthetic hormone
that is slowly released over a period of up to five
years. It functions like Depo-Provera in that it prevents the ovaries from producing ova (eggs) and also
results in thicker mucus in the cervix, which prevents
the sperm from passing through the cervix. Norplant
can be inserted at any time.
Preparation
The woman being considered for Depo-Provera
or Lunelle will have a pelvic and breast examination, a
Pap test (a microscopic examination of cell samples
taken from the cervix), blood pressure check, weight
check, and a review of her medical history. Women
who have diabetes mellitus, major depression, blood
clotting problems, liver disease, or weight problems
should use these methods only under strict medical
supervision. Depo-Provera or Lunelle should not be
used if the woman is pregnant, has unexplained vaginal bleeding, suffers from severe liver disease, has
breast cancer, or has a history of blood clots or stroke.
Individuals who select Norplant will receive the
same basic physical examination. If approved for this
method, a site of implantation will be selected (usually
the inside of the upper arm), and the area prepared for
minor surgery. The skin will be washed with soap and
water, and an antiseptic, such as iodine solution, will
be applied. The physician will use a local anesthetic to
numb the area, a small incision will be made, the six
Norplant capsules will be inserted, and the incision
sewn up (sutured). Protection against pregnancy normally begins within 24 hours. If necessary, the
implants can be removed in 15–20 minutes. Norplant
should not be used by women who are pregnant, have
blood clotting problems, or have unexplained vaginal
bleeding. Advantages include light periods with less
cramping and decreased anemia. This form of birth
control may also be protective against endometrial
cancer.
Because Depo-Provera and Norplant use only the
hormone progestin, they may provide an alternative
for women who can not use estrogen-containing birth
control pills. One benefit of Lunelle, however, is that
its effects wear off more quickly than Depo-Provera,
an important factor in the event that a woman has
serious side effects or wants to become pregnant.
Risks
The most common side effects associated with
Depo-Provera and Lunelle are yellowing of the skin,
headache, nervousness, dizziness, abdominal pain, hair
loss, rash, increase in the number of migraine headaches, increased or decreased interest in sexual intercourse, the development of dark spots on the skin,
depression, and weakness. Danger signs that need to
reported immediately include weight gain, heavy vaginal bleeding, frequent urination, blurred vision, fainting, severe abdominal pain, and coughing up blood.
Because the effects of Depo-Provera may last up to
12 weeks, it may take a longer time for women trying to conceive to become pregnant after discontinuing
the injections.
The main reactions to Norplant include headache,
weight gain, irregular periods or no period at all,
breast tenderness, acne, gain or loss of facial hair,
color changes of the skin over the area of insertion,
and ovarian cysts. The doctor should be notified
immediately of lumps in the breast, heavy vaginal
bleeding, yellowing of the skin or eyes, or infection
of the incision. Women who use Norplant are discouraged from smoking.
Normal results
These hormone contraceptive methods normally
result in a success rate of 99%.