Definition
Depression or depressive disorders (unipolar
depression) are mental illnesses characterized by a
profound and persistent feeling of sadness or despair
and/or a loss of interest in things that once were pleasurable. Disturbance in sleep, appetite, and mental
processes are a common accompaniment.
Description
Everyone experiences feelings of unhappiness and
sadness occasionally. But when these depressed feelings start to dominate everyday life and cause physical
and mental deterioration, they become what are
known as depressive disorders. Each year in the
United States, depressive disorders affect an estimated
17 million people at an approximate annual direct and
indirect cost of $53 billion. One in four women is likely
to experience an episode of severe depression in her
lifetime, with a 10–20% lifetime prevalence, compared
to 5–10% for men. The average age a first depressive
episode occurs is in the mid-20s, although the disorder
strikes all age groups indiscriminately, from children
to the elderly.
There are two main categories of depressive disorders: major depressive disorder and dysthymic disorder. Major depressive disorder is a moderate to
severe episode of depression lasting two or more
weeks. Individuals experiencing this major depressive
episode may have trouble sleeping, lose interest in
activities they once took pleasure in, experience a
change in weight, have difficulty concentrating, feel
worthless and hopeless, or have a preoccupation with
death orsuicide. In children, the major depression may
appear as irritability.
While major depressive episodes may be acute
(intense but short-lived), dysthymic disorder is an
ongoing, chronic depression that lasts two or more
years (one or more years in children) and has an
average duration of 16 years. The mild to moderate
depression of dysthymic disorder may rise and fall in
intensity, and those afflicted with the disorder may
experience some periods of normal, non-depressed
mood of up to two months in length. Its onset is
gradual, and dysthymic patients may not be able to
pinpoint exactly when they started feeling depressed.
Individuals with dysthymic disorder may experience a
change in sleeping and eating patterns, low selfesteem, fatigue, trouble concentrating, and feelings of
hopelessness.
Depression also can occur in bipolar disorder, an
affective mental illness that causes radical emotional
changes and mood swings, from manic highs to
depressive lows. The majority of bipolar individuals
experience alternating episodes of mania and
depression.
Causes and symptoms
The causes behind depression are complex and
not yet fully understood. While an imbalance of certain neurotransmitters—the chemicals in the brain
that transmit messages between nerve cells—is
believed to be key to depression, external factors
such as upbringing (more so in dysthymia than
major depression) may be as important. For example,
it is speculated that, if an individual is abused and
neglected throughout childhood and adolescence, a pattern of low self-esteem and negative thinking may
emerge. From that, a lifelong pattern of depression
may follow. A 2003 study reported that two-thirds of
patients with major depression say they also suffer
from chronic pain. A 2004 study linked severe obesity
with major depression. Another study showed a
strong relationship between smoking and depression
among teens.
Heredity seems to play a role in who develops
depressive disorders. Individuals with major depression in their immediate family are up to three times
more likely to have the disorder themselves. It would
seem that biological and genetic factors may make
certain individuals pre-disposed or prone to depressive
disorders, but environmental circumstances often may
trigger the disorder.
External stressors and significant life changes,
such as chronic medical problems, death of a loved
one, divorce or estrangement, miscarriage, or loss of a
job, also can result in a form of depression known as
adjustment disorder. Although periods of adjustment
disorder usually resolve themselves, occasionally they
may evolve into a major depressive disorder.
Major depressive episode
Individuals experiencing a major depressive episode have a depressed mood and/or a diminished
interest or pleasure in activities. Children experiencing
a major depressive episode may appear or feel irritable
rather than depressed. In addition, five or more of the
following symptoms will occur on an almost daily
basis for a period of at least two weeks:
 Significant change in weight.
 Insomnia or hypersomnia (excessive sleep).
 Psychomotor agitation or retardation.
 Fatigue or loss of energy.
 Feelings of worthlessness or inappropriate guilt.
 Diminished ability to think or to concentrate, or
indecisiveness.
 Recurrent thoughts of death or suicide and/or
suicide attempts.
Dysthymic disorder
Dysthymia commonly occurs in tandem with
other psychiatric and physical conditions. Up to
70% of dysthymic patients have both dysthymic disorder and major depressive disorder, known as double
depression. Substance abuse, panic disorders, personality disorders, social phobias, and other psychiatric
conditions also are found in many dysthymic patients.
Dysthymia is prevalent in patients with certain
medical conditions, including multiple sclerosis,
AIDS, hypothyroidism, chronic fatigue syndrome,
Parkinson’s disease, diabetes, and post-cardiac transplantation. The connection between dysthymic disorder and these medical conditions is unclear, but it may
be related to the way the medical condition and/or its
pharmacological treatment affects neurotransmitters.
Dysthymic disorder can lengthen or complicate the
recovery of patients also suffering from medical
conditions.
Along with an underlying feeling of depression,
people with dysthymic disorder experience two or
more of the following symptoms on an almost daily
basis for a period for two or more years (most
suffer for five years), or one year or more for
children:
 under or overeating
 insomnia or hypersomnia
 low energy or fatigue
 low self-esteem
 poor concentration or trouble making decisions
 feelings of hopelessness
Diagnosis
In addition to an interview, several clinical
inventories or scales may be used to assess a patient’s
mental status and determine the presence of depressive symptoms. Among these tests are: the Hamilton
Depression Scale (HAM-D), Child Depression
Inventory (CDI), Geriatric Depression Scale
(GDS), Beck Depression Inventory (BDI), and the
Zung Self-Rating Scale for Depression. These tests
may be administered in an outpatient or hospital
setting by a general practitioner, social worker,
psychiatrist, or psychologist.Treatment
Major depressive and dysthymic disorders are
typically treated with antidepressants or psychosocial
therapy. Psychosocial therapy focuses on the personal
and interpersonal issues behind depression, while antidepressant medication is prescribed to provide more
immediate relief for the symptoms of the disorder.
When used together correctly, therapy and antidepressants are a powerful treatment plan for the depressed
patient.
Antidepressants
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
such as fluoxetine (Prozac) and sertraline (Zoloft)
reduce depression by increasing levels of serotonin, a
neurotransmitter. Some clinicians prefer SSRIs for
treatment of dysthymic disorder. Anxiety, diarrhea,
drowsiness, headache, sweating, nausea, poor sexual
functioning, and insomnia all are possible side effects
of SSRIs. In early 2004, a joint panel of the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) issued stronger
warnings to physicians and parents about increased
risk of suicide among children and adolescents taking
SSRIs.
Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) are less expensive than SSRIs, but have more severe side-effects,
which may include persistent dry mouth, sedation,
dizziness, and cardiac arrhythmias. Because of these
side effects, caution is taken when prescribing TCAs to
elderly patients. TCAs include amitriptyline (Elavil),
imipramine (Tofranil), and nortriptyline (Aventyl,
Pamelor). A 10-day supply of TCAs can be lethal if
ingested all at once, so these drugs may not be a
preferred treatment option for patients at risk for
suicide.
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) such as
tranylcypromine (Parnate) and phenelzine (Nardil)
block the action of monoamine oxidase (MAO), an
enzyme in the central nervous system. Patients taking
MAOIs must cut foods high in tyramine (found in
aged cheeses and meats) out of their diet to avoid
potentially serious hypertensive side effects.
Heterocyclics include bupropion (Wellbutrin) and
trazodone (Desyrel). Bupropion should not be prescribed to patients with a seizure disorder. Side effects
of the drug may include agitation, anxiety, confusion,
tremor, dry mouth, fast or irregular heartbeat, headache, low blood pressure, and insomnia. Because trazodone has a sedative effect, it is useful in treating
depressed patients with insomnia. Other possible side
effects of trazodone include dry mouth, gastrointestinal distress, dizziness, and headache. In 2003,
Wellbutrin’s manufacturer released a once–daily version of the drug that offered low risk of sexual side
effects or weight gain.Psychosocial therapy
Psychotherapy explores an individual’s life to
bring to light possible contributing causes of the present depression. During treatment, the therapist helps
the patient to become self-aware of his or her thinking
patterns and how they came to be. There are several
different subtypes of psychotherapy, but all have the
common goal of helping the patient develop healthy
problem solving and coping skills.
Cognitive-behavioral therapy assumes that the
patient’s faulty thinking is causing the current
depression and focuses on changing the depressed
patient’s thought patterns and perceptions. The
therapist helps the patient identify negative or distorted thought patterns and the emotions and
behavior that accompany them, and then retrains
the depressed individual to recognize the thinking
and react differently to it.
Electroconvulsant therapy
ECT, or electroconvulsive therapy, usually is
employed after all therapy and pharmaceutical treatment options have been explored. However, it is sometimes used early in treatment when severe depression is
present and the patient refuses oral medication, or
when the patient is becoming dehydrated, extremely
suicidal, or psychotic.
The treatment consists of a series of electrical
pulses that move into the brain through electrodes on
the patient’s head. ECT is given under general anesthesia and patients are administered a muscle relaxant to
prevent convulsions. Although the exact mechanisms
behind the success of ECT therapy are not known, it is
believed that the electrical current modifies the electrochemical processes of the brain, consequently
relieving depression. Headaches, muscle soreness,
nausea, and confusion are possible side effects immediately following an ECT procedure. Memory loss,
typically transient, also has been reported in ECT
patients.
Alternative treatment
St. John’s wort (Hypericum perforatum) is used
throughout Europe to treat depressive symptoms.
Unlike traditional prescription antidepressants, this
herbal antidepressant has few reported side effects.
Despite uncertainty concerning its effectiveness, a
2003 report said acceptance of the treatment continues
to increase. A poll showed that about 41% of 15,000
science professionals in 62 countries said they would
use St. John’s wort for mild to moderate depression.
Although St. John’s wort appears to be a safe alternative to conventional antidepressants, care should be
taken, as the herb can interfere with the actions of
some pharmaceuticals. The usual dose is 300 mg
three times daily.
Homeopathic treatment also can be therapeutic in
treating depression. Good nutrition, proper sleep,
exercise, and full engagement in life are very important
to a healthy mental state.
In several small studies, S-adenosyl-methionine
(SAM, SAMe) was shown to be more effective than
placebo and equally effective as tricyclic antidepressants in treating depression. The usual dosage is 200
mg to 400 mg twice daily. In 2003, a U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services team reviewed 100
clinical trials on SAMe and concluded that it worked
as well as many prescription medications without the
side effects of stomach upset and decreased sexual
desire.In 2003, a report from Great Britain emphasized
that more physicians should encourage alternative
treatments such as behavioral and self-help programs,
supervised exercise programs, and watchful waiting
before subscribing antidepressant medications for
mild depression.
Prognosis
Untreated or improperly treated depression is the
number one cause of suicide in the United States.
Proper treatment relieves symptoms in 80–90% of
depressed patients. After each major depressive episode, the risk of recurrence climbs significantly—50%
after one episode, 70% after two episodes, and 90%
after three episodes. For this reason, patients need to
be aware of the symptoms of recurring depression and
may require long-term maintenance treatment of antidepressants and/or therapy.
Research has found that depression may lead to
other problems as well. Increased risk of heart disease
has been linked to depression, particularly in postmenopausal women. And while chronic pain may
cause depression, a 2004 study in Canada revealed
that depression also may lead to back pain.
Prevention
Patient education in the form of therapy or selfhelp groups is crucial for training patients with
depressive disorders to recognize symptoms of depression and to take an active part in their treatment
program. Extended maintenance treatment with antidepressants may be required in some patients to prevent relapse. Early intervention for children with
depression is effective in arresting development of
more severe problems.