Definition
Dermatomyositis (DM) is a rare inflammatory
muscle disease that leads to destruction of muscle
tissue usually accompanied by pain and weakness.
Description
Dermatomyositis is one of a group of three related
diseases called inflammatory myopathies. The other
two are polymyositis and inclusion-body myositis.
These diseases are rare; only about 20,000 people in
the United States have dermatomyositis. Another estimates suggest that DM occurs in about 5.5 individuals
out of every one million. The disease is of unknown
origin and can develop in children and adults. Most
often individuals either develop DM either between
the ages of five and 14 or they do not develop it until
they are over age 45. In all age groups, females are
twice as likely to develop the disease than males.
Although DM causes pain and weakness, it is not
necessarily life threatening. However, adults, but not
children, who develop DM have an increased risk of developing cancer and should be screened for malignancies regularly.
Causes and symptoms
The exact cause of dermatomyositis is unknown.
It is an autoimmune disease. In a healthy body, cells of
immune system attack only foreign or defective cells in
the body to protect it from disease. In an autoimmune
disease, the immune system attacks normal body cells.
In the case of DM, immune system cells attack healthy
cells of small blood vessels in the muscle and skin.
Over time, this causes muscle fiber to shrink and sometimes cuts off blood supply to the muscle. DM tends to
develop in muscles closest to the center of the body.
As yet, there is no clear explanation of what
causes an individual to develop DM. It is thought
that the disease may be triggered by a virus or exposure to certain drugs or vaccines. According to the
Muscular Dystrophy Association, recent research suggests developing DM may be related to the mixing of
blood cells that sometimes occurs between the mother
and fetus during pregnancy. The disease is not directly
inherited, although there may be some genetic sensitivity toward whatever triggers it.
Often the first sign of DM is the development of a
patchy, scaly, violet to dark red skin rash on the face,
neck, shoulders, upper chest, knees, or back. Often the
rash appears before any signs of illness or muscle
weakness. About 40% of children and teens develop
hard, painful bumps under the skin that are deposits of
calcium, a mineral used in bone formation. This condition, called calcinosis, is much less common in
adults.
Muscle weakness, especially in the upper arms,
hips, thighs, and neck, becomes apparent in activities
such as climbing stairs or reaching up over the head.
This weakness develops after the rash appears. Some
people have difficulty swallowing and chewing when
the muscles of the face and esophagus are affected.
Individuals may also feel tried, weak, have a low-grade
fever, weight loss, and joint stiffness. Some individuals
have the rash for years before they progress to these
symptoms, while in others the onset of symptoms is
rapid. In children the development of symptoms is
almost always gradual, making diagnosis especially
difficult.
Diagnosis
DM can be difficult to diagnose, and often the
first doctor an individual sees is a dermatologist for
treatment of the rash and then is referred to a
rheumatologist, specialist in internal medicine or neurologist when DM is suspected. Many tests may be
done to rule out other diseases before a firm diagnosis
is made. A blood test is done to measure the level of
creatine kinase. Creatine kinase is an enzyme found in
muscle tissue. When muscle is damaged, this enzyme
leaks out into the blood. An increased level of creatine
kinase in the blood suggests DM as a possible diagnosis. Another blood test may be done to test for
specific immune system antibodies. Antibodies are
proteins made in response to material the body thinks
is foreign.
An electromyogram (EMG) is a test that measures
electrical activity in muscles as they contract.
Individuals with inflammatory myopathies usually
have distinct patterns of electrical activity in the
affected muscles. However, up to 15% of people with
DM have normal electromyogram readings, so this
test is not definitive. The definitive test is a muscle
biopsy. The doctor takes a small sample of muscle
tissue and examines it under a microscope. From this
sample, the doctor can differentiate DM from other
inflammatory myopathies and other muscle wasting
diseases.
Treatment
The goal of treatment is to improve muscle
strength and allow the individual to participate in
normal daily activities. Individuals are given steroid
drugs (prednisone, corticosteroids) that suppress the
immune system. Over time, these drugs often produce
undesirable side effects, so treatment is usually begun
with a large dose, then tapered to the minimum dose
needed for maintenance. People who do not respond
well to steroid treatment may be treated with other
immunosuppressive drugs or intravenous immunoglobulin. Individuals with DM are advised to avoid
exposure to the sun, as sunlight worsens the skin rash.
Physical therapy is often helpful in keeping joints from
stiffening and freezing. Moderate exercise is also
recommended.
Alternative treatment
A healthy diet high is recommended for all individuals with supplemental protein for those with severe
muscle damage.
Prognosis
The course of DM is highly variable. In about
20% of people, the disease spontaneously goes into
remission and individuals are able to lead symptom
free lives for long periods. On the other hand, in about
5% of individuals the disease progresses to death
because of heart and lung involvement. The majority
of people continue to have some symptoms and
require long-term treatment, but their degree of daily
activity varies greatly.
Serious complications from DM include involvement of the muscles of the heart and lungs, difficulty
eating and swallowing, and a tendency to develop
cancer. This association is seen only in adults and
not in children. Individuals over age 60 are more likely
to have serious complications than younger
individuals.
Prevention
There is no known way to prevent this disease.