Definition
Dermatitis is a general term used to describe
inflammation of the skin.
Description
Most types of dermatitis are characterized by an
itchy pink or red rash.
Contact dermatitis is an allergic reaction to something that irritates the skin and is manifested by one or
more lines of red, swollen, blistered skin that may itch
or seep. It usually appears within 48 hours after touching or brushing against a substance to which the skin is
sensitive. The condition is more common in adults
than in children.
Contact dermatitis can occur on any part of the
body, but it usually affects the hands, feet, and groin.
Contact dermatitis usually does not spread from one
person to another, nor does it spread beyond the area
exposed to the irritant unless affected skin comes into
contact with another part of the body. However, in the
case of some irritants, such as poison ivy, contact
dermatitis can be passed to another person or to
another part of the body.
Stasis dermatitis is characterized by scaly, greasy
looking skin on the lower legs and around the ankles.
Stasis dermatitis is most apt to affect the inner side of
the calf.
Nummular dermatitis, which is also called nummular eczematous dermatitis or nummular eczema, generally affects the hands, arms, legs, and buttocks of men
and women older than 55 years of age. This stubborn
inflamed rash forms circular, sometimes itchy, patches
and is characterized by flares and periods of inactivity.
Atopic dermatitis is characterized by itching, scaling, swelling, and sometimes blistering. In early childhood it is called infantile eczema and is characterized
by redness, oozing, and crusting. It is usually found on
the face, inside the elbows, and behind the knees.
Seborrheic dermatitis may be dry or moist and is
characterized by greasy scales and yellowish crusts on
the scalp, eyelids, face, external surfaces of the ears,
underarms, breasts, and groin. In infants it is called
‘cradle cap.’
Causes and symptoms
Allergic reactions are genetically determined, and
different substances cause contact dermatitis to
develop in different people. A reaction to resin produced by poison ivy, poison oak, or poison sumac is
the most common source of symptoms. It is, in fact,
the most common allergy in this country, affecting one
of every two people in the United States.
Flowers, herbs, and vegetables can also affect the
skin of some people. Burns and sunburn increase the
risk of dermatitis developing, and chemical irritants
that can cause the condition include:
 chlorine
 cleansers
 detergents and soaps
 fabric softeners
 glues used on artificial nails
 perfumes
 topical medications
Contact dermatitis can develop when the first
contact occurs or after years of use or exposure.
Stasis dermatitis, a consequence of poor circulation, occurs when leg veins can no longer return blood
to the heart as efficiently as they once did. When that
happens, fluid collects in the lower legs and causes
them to swell. Stasis dermatitis can also result in a
rash that can break down into sores known as stasis
ulcers.
The cause of nummular dermatitis is not known,
but it usually occurs in cold weather and is most
common in people who have dry skin. Hot weather
and stress can aggravate this condition, as can the
following:
 allergies
 fabric softeners
 soaps and detergents
 wool clothing
 bathing more than once a day
Atopic dermatitis can be caused by allergies,
asthma, or stress, and there seems to be a genetic
predisposition for atopic conditions. It is sometimes
caused by an allergy to nickel in jewelry.
Seborrheic dermatitis (for which there may also
be a genetic predisposition) is usually caused by
overproduction of the oil glands. In adults it can
be associated with diabetes mellitus or gold allergy.
In infants and adults it may be caused by a biotin
deficiency.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of dermatitis is made on the basis of
how the rash looks and its location. The doctor may
scrape off a small piece of affected skin for microscopic examination or direct the patient to discontinue
use of any potential irritant that has recently come into
contact with the affected area. Two weeks after the
rash disappears, the patient may resume use of the
substances, one at a time, until the condition recurs.
Eliminating the substance most recently added should
eliminate the irritation.
If the origin of the irritation has still not been
identified, a dermatologist may perform one or more
patch tests. This involves dabbing a small amount of a
suspected irritant onto skin on the patient’s back. If no
irritation develops within a few days, another patch
test is performed. The process continues until the
patient experiences an allergic reaction at the spot
where the irritant was applied.
Treatment
Treating contact dermatitis begins with eliminating
or avoiding the source of irritation. Prescription or overthe-counter corticosteroid creams can lessen inflammation and relieve irritation. Creams, lotions, or ointments
not specifically formulated for dermatitis can intensify
the irritation. Oral antihistamines are sometimes recommended to alleviate itching, and antibiotics are prescribed if the rash becomes infected. Medications taken
by mouth to relieve symptoms of dermatitis can make
skin red and scaly and cause hair loss.
Patients who have a history of dermatitis should
remove their rings before washing their hands. They
should use bath oils or glycerine-based soaps and
bathe in lukewarm saltwater.
Patting rather than rubbing the skin after bathing
and thoroughly massaging lubricating lotion or nonprescription cortisone creams into still-damp skin can
soothe red, irritated nummular dermatitis. Highly
concentrated cortisone preparations should not be
applied to the face, armpits, groin, or rectal area.
Periodic medical monitoring is necessary to detect
side effects in patients who use such preparations on
rashes covering large areas of the body.
Coal-tar salves can help relieve symptoms of
nummular dermatitis that have not responded to
other treatments, but these ointments have an unpleasant odor and stain clothing.
Patients who have stasis dermatitis should elevate
their legs as often as possible and sleep with a pillow
between the lower legs.
Tar or zinc paste may also be used to treat stasis
dermatitis. Because these compounds must remain in
contact with the rash for as long as two weeks, the
paste and bandages must be applied by a nurse or a
doctor.
Coal-tar shampoos may be used for seborrheic
dermatitis that occurs on the scalp. Sun exposure
after the use of these shampoos should be avoided
because the risk of sunburn of the scalp is increased.
Alternative treatment
Some herbal therapies can be useful for skin conditions. Among the herbs most often recommended
are:
 Burdock root (Arctium lappa)
 Calendula (Calendula officinalis) ointment
 Chamomile (Matricaria recutita) ointment
 Cleavers (Galium ssp.)
 Evening primrose oil (Oenothera biennis)
 Nettles (Urtica dioica)
Contact dermatitis can be treated botanically and
homeopathically. Grindelia (Grindelia spp.) and sassafras (Sassafras albidum) can help when applied topically. Determining the source of the problem and
eliminating it is essential. Oatmeal baths are very helpful in relieving the itch. Bentonite clay packs or any
mud pack draws the fluid out and helps dry up the
lesions. Cortisone creams are not recommended.
Stasis dermatitis should be treated by a trained
practitioner. This condition responds well to topical
herbal therapies, however, the cause must also be
addressed. Selenium-based shampoos, topical applications of flax oil and/or olive oil, and biotin
supplementation are among the therapies recommended for seborrheic dermatitis.
Prognosis
Dermatitis is often chronic, but symptoms can
generally be controlled.
Prevention
Contact dermatitis can be prevented by avoiding
the source of irritation. If the irritant cannot be
avoided completely, the patient should wear gloves
and other protective clothing whenever exposure is
likely to occur.
Immediately washing the exposed area with soap
and water can stem allergic reactions to poison ivy,
poison oak, or poison sumac, but because soaps can
dry the skin, patients susceptible to dermatitis should
use them only on the face, feet, genitals, and
underarms.
Clothing should be loose fitting and 100% cotton.
New clothing should be washed in dye-free, unscented
detergent before being worn.
Injury to the lower leg can cause stasis dermatitis
to ulcerate (form open sores). If stasis ulcers develop, a
doctor should be notified immediately.
Yoga and other relaxation techniques may help
prevent atopic dermatitis caused by stress.
Avoidance of sweating may aid in preventing
seborrheic dermatitis.
A patient who has dermatitis should also notify a
doctor if any of the following occurs:
 fever develops
 skin oozes or other signs of infection appear
 symptoms do not begin to subside after seven days’
treatment
 he/she comes into contact with someone who has a
wart, cold sore, or other viral skin infection