Definition
DES (diethylstilbestrol) is a hormone that was
prescribed for pregnant women in the 1950s and
early 1960s. Many years later, doctors discovered
that the daughters of the women who received DES
were at high risk for a variety of problems, including
infertility, premature labor, and cancer of the vagina
and cervix.
Description
In the 1950s and early 1960s, several drug companies claimed that DES (diethylstilbestrol) could prevent miscarriages. DES is a synthetic hormone, related
to estrogen. Since up to 20% of all pregnancies end in
miscarriage, this seemed like an important breakthrough and DES was prescribed for many women
who had bleeding in early pregnancy. Ultimately, it
was found to have no effect on miscarriages and the
practice of prescribing DES was stopped in the 1960s.
Almost 10 years later, the daughters of women who
had taken DES during pregnancy began to develop
unusual symptoms.
Doctors discovered that when these young women
reached their teens, they were at higher risk for a
variety of problems, including:
 clear cell adenocarcinoma of the vagina and cervix
 infertility
 premature labor and other problems in pregnancy
It is estimated that five to 10 million people in
the United States were exposed to DES between 1938
and 1971.
Causes and symptoms
DES has affected a very specific group of women.
These are women who were exposed to DES in utero
before 18 weeks of pregnancy. In other words, their
mothers must have taken DES within the first four five months of pregnancy. It is now known that the
female reproductive organs are formed during that
time. DES appears to interfere with proper growth
and development of the uterus, cervix, vagina, and
fallopian tubes. In 2003, new research showed that
DES also was associated with increased risk of breast
cancer.
In the early 1970s, there was an increase in a rare
form of cancer, clear cell adenocarcinoma of the
vagina and cervix. Up until that time, doctors had
seen these cancers only in elderly women. Suddenly,
young women who had the disease appeared.
This was so unusual that researchers studied these
women to see if they had anything in common. After a
great deal of questioning and examination, it was
found that they all had one factor in common. All of
the young women had been exposed to DES in utero in
the early weeks of pregnancy.
Today, it is difficult to imagine how shocking this
discovery was. Doctors had only recently recognized
that medications and exposure to chemicals during
pregnancy could cause birth defects. This was a birth
defect that had gone undetected for almost two
decades.
Since then, doctors have studied DES daughters
very carefully. Fortunately, the risk of clear cell adenocarcinoma is actually quite low. In fact, it appears that
if a DES daughter has not developed this cancer by age
30, she will not develop it. Since all DES daughters are
now over age 30, there should be no further cases
related to DES exposure. However, there are a number
of other symptoms and problems associated with DES
exposure.
 Cervix and vagina. DES daughters often have distinctive changes of the cervix and vagina that can be
seen during a pelvic exam. These changes include a
cervical hood (a vaginal fold draped over the cervix),
cockscomb cervix (an abnormally shaped cervix),
and adenosis (glandular cells normally located
within the cervix that appear on the outside of the
cervix and in the vagina).
 Fallopian tubes. Some DES daughters have fallopian
tube abnormalities that lead to infertility.
 Uterus. Many DES daughters have a uterus that is
abnormal in size and shape. The classic sign is the
T-shaped uterus. In the normal uterus, the cavity
(hollow space inside) is rounded. In a T-shaped
uterus, the cavity is reduced to a thin T. The abnormal shape of the inside of the uterus makes it harder
for a woman to get pregnant and leads to a higher
risk of premature labor and birth.
Diagnosis
Women who have been exposed to DES should
have a pelvic exam at least once a year. In addition to
the usual pelvic exam and Pap smear, DES daughters
also should have Pap smears of the vagina and, if
possible, colposcopy. During colposcopy, the doctor
looks at the cervix and vagina through a special magnifying scope. In this way, tiny areas of abnormal cells
can be seen. This procedure is easily performed in the
doctor’s office.
When DES daughters get pregnant, they may be
at high risk for premature labor and birth and should
be monitored very carefully.
Not all women who were exposed to DES develop
problems in pregnancy. However, if problems like
infertility or miscarriage occur, the doctor may recommend a special x-ray test to check the woman’s fallopian tubes and uterus. This special test is called a
hysterosalpingogram.
Treatment
There is no treatment for the abnormalities of the
fallopian tubes and uterus caused by DES exposure.
Fortunately, there are treatments that can help with
infertility and premature labor. Clear cell adenocarcinoma of the vagina or cervix must be treated with
surgery and, possibly, chemotherapy.