Definition
Detoxification is one of the more widely used
treatments and concepts in alternative medicine. It is
based on the principle that illnesses can be caused by
the accumulation of toxic substances (toxins) in the
body. Eliminating existing toxins and avoiding new
toxins are essential parts of the healing process.
Detoxification utilizes a variety of tests and
techniques.
Purpose
Detoxification is helpful for those patients suffering from many chronic diseases and conditions,
including allergies, anxiety, arthritis, asthma,
chronic infections, depression, diabetes, headaches,
heart disease, high cholesterol, low blood sugar
levels, digestive disorders, mental illness, and obesity. It is helpful for those with conditions that are
influenced by environmental factors, such as cancer,
as well as for those who have been exposed to high
levels of toxic materials due to accident or occupation. Detoxification therapy is useful for those suffering from allergies or immune system problems
that conventional medicine is unable to diagnose
or treat, including chronic fatigue syndrome, environmental illness/multiple chemical sensitivity, and
fibromyalgia. Symptoms for those suffering these
conditions may include unexplained fatigue,
increased allergies, hypersensitivity to common
materials, intolerance to certain foods and indigestion, aches and pains, low grade fever, headaches,
insomnia, depression, sore throats, sudden weight
loss or gain, lowered resistance to infection, general
malaise, and disability. Detoxification can be used
as a beneficial preventative measure and as a tool to
increase overall health, vitality, and resistance to
disease.
Description
Origins
Detoxification methods of healing have been used
for thousands of years. Fasting is one of the oldest
therapeutic practices in medicine. Hippocrates, the
ancient Greek known as the ‘‘Father of Western medicine,’’ recommended fasting as a means for improving
health. Ayurvedic medicine, a traditional healing system that has developed over thousands of years, utilizes detoxification methods to treat many chronic
conditions and to prevent illness.
Detoxification treatment has become one of the
cornerstones of alternative medicine. Conventional
medicine notes that environmental factors can play a
significant role in many illnesses. Environmental medicine is a field that studies exactly how those environmental factors influence disease. Conditions such as
asthma, cancer, chronic fatigue syndrome, multiple
chemical sensitivity, and many others are strongly
influenced by exposure to toxic or allergenic substances in the environment. The United States
Centers for Disease Control estimate that over 80%
of all illnesses have environmental and lifestyle causes.
Detoxification has also become a prominent treatment as people have become more aware of environmental pollution. It is estimated that one in every four
Americans suffers from some level of heavy metal
poisoning. Heavy metals, such as lead, mercury, cadmium, and arsenic, are by-products of industry.
Synthetic agriculture chemicals, many of which are
known to cause health problems, are also found in
food, air, and water. American agriculture uses nearly
10lb (4.5 kg) of pesticides per person on the food
supply each year. These toxins have become almost
unavoidable. Pesticides that are used only on crops in
the southern United States have been found in the
tissue of animals in the far north of Canada. DDT, a
cancer-causing insecticide that has been banned for
decades, is still regularly found in the fatty tissue of
animals, birds, and fish, even in extremely remote
regions such as the North Pole.
The problem of toxins in the environment is compounded because humans are at the top of the food
chain and are more likely to be exposed to an accumulation of toxic substances in the food supply. For
instance, pesticides and herbicides are sprayed on
grains that are then fed to farm animals. Toxic substances are stored in the fatty tissue of those animals.
In addition, those animals are often injected with synthetic hormones, antibiotics, and other chemicals.
When people eat meat products, they are exposed to
the full range of chemicals and additives used along
the entire agricultural chain. Detoxification specialists
call this build up of toxins bioaccumulation. They
assert that the bioaccumulation of toxic substances
over time is responsible for many physical and mental
disorders, especially ones that are increasing rapidly
(like asthma, cancer, and mental illness). As a result,
detoxification therapies are increasing in importance
and popularity.
Toxins in the body include heavy metals and various
chemicals such as pesticides, pollutants, and food additives. Drugs and alcohol have toxic effects in the body.
Toxins are produced as normal by-products in the intestines by the bacteria that break down food. The digestion
of protein also creates toxic by-products in the body.
The body has natural methods of detoxification.
Individual cells get detoxified in the lymph and circulatory system. The liver is the principle organ of
detoxification, assisted by the kidneys and intestines.
Toxins can be excreted from the body by the kidneys,
bowels, skin, and lungs. Detoxification treatments
become necessary when the body’s natural detoxification systems become overwhelmed. This can be caused
by long-term effects of improper diet, stress, overeating, sedentary lifestyles, illness, and poor health habits
in general. When a build up of toxic substances in the
body creates illness, it’s called toxemia. Some people’s
digestive tracts become unable to digest food properly,
due to years of overeating and diets that are high in fat
and processed foods and low in fiber (the average
American diet). When this happens, food cannot
pass through the digestive tract efficiently. Instead of
being digested properly or eliminated from the bowel,
food can literally rot inside the digestive tract and
produce toxic by-products. This state is known as
toxic colon syndrome or intestinal toxemia.
Detoxification therapies try to activate and assist
the body’s own detoxification processes. They also try
to eliminate additional exposure to toxins and
strengthen the body and immune system so that toxic
imbalances won’t occur in the future.
Testing for toxic substances
Detoxification specialists use a variety of tests to
determine the causes contributing to toxic conditions.
These causes include infections, allergies, addictions,
toxic chemicals, and digestive and organ dysfunction.
Blood, urine, stool, and hair analyses, as well as
allergy tests, are used to measure a variety of bodily
functions that may indicate problems. Detoxification
therapists usually have access to laboratories that specialize in sophisticated diagnostic tests for toxic
conditions.
People who have toxemia are often susceptible to
infection because their immune systems are weakened.
Infections can be caused by parasites, bacteria,
viruses, and a common yeast. Therapists will screen
patients for underlying infections that may be contributing to illness.
Liver function is studied closely with blood and
urine tests because the liver is the principle organ in the
body responsible for removing toxic compounds.
When the liver detoxifies a substance from the body,
it does so in two phases. Tests are performed that
indicate where problems may be occurring in these
phases, which may point to specific types of toxins.
Blood and urine tests can also be completed that
screen for toxic chemicals such as PCBs (environmental poisons), formaldehyde (a common preservative),
pesticides, and heavy metals. Another useful blood
test is a test for zinc deficiency, which may reveal
heavy metal poisoning. Hair analysis is used to test
for heavy metal levels in the body. Blood and urine
tests check immune system activity, and hormone
levels can also indicate specific toxic compounds. A
24-hour urine analysis, where samples are taken
around the clock, allows therapists to determine the
efficiency of the digestive tract and kidneys. Together
with stool analysis, these tests may indicate toxic
bowel syndrome and digestive system disorders.
Certain blood and urine tests may point to nutritional
deficiencies and proper recovery diets can be designed
for patients as well.
Detoxification therapists may also perform extensive allergy and hypersensitivity tests. Intradermal
(between layers of the skin) and sublingual (under
the tongue) allergy tests are used to determine
a patient’s sensitivity to a variety of common
substances, including formaldehyde, auto exhaust,
perfume, tobacco, chlorine, jet fuel, and other
chemicals.
Food allergies require additional tests because
these allergies often cause reactions that are
delayed for several days after the food is eaten.
The RAST (radioallergosorbent test) is a blood
test that determines the level of antibodies (immunoglobulins) in the blood after specific foods are
eaten. The cytotoxic test is a blood test that determines if certain substances affect blood cells,
including foods and chemicals. The ELISA-ACT
(enzyme-linked immunoserological assay activated
cell test) is considered to be one of the most accurate tests for allergies and hypersensitivity to foods,
chemicals, and other agents. Other tests for food
allergies are the elimination and rotation diets, in
which foods are systematically evaluated to determine the ones that are causing problems.
Detoxification therapists usually interview and
counsel patients closely to determine and correct lifestyle, occupational, psychological, and emotional factors that may also be contributing to illness.
Detoxification therapies
Detoxification therapists use a variety of healing
techniques after a diagnosis is made. The first step is to
eliminate a patient’s exposure to all toxic or allergenic
substances. These include heavy metals, chemicals,
radiation (from x rays, power lines, cell phones, computer screens, and microwaves), smog, polluted water,
foods, drugs, caffeine, alcohol, perfume, excess
noise, and stress. If mercury poisoning has been determined, the patient will be advised to have mercury
fillings from the teeth removed, preferably by a holistic
dentist.
Specific treatments are used to stimulate and
assist the body’s detoxification process. Dietary
change is immediately enacted, eliminating allergic
and unhealthy foods, and emphasizing foods that
assist detoxification and support healing.
Detoxification diets are generally low in fat, high
in fiber, and vegetarian with a raw food emphasis.
Processed foods, alcohol, and caffeine are avoided.
Nutritional supplements such as vitamins, minerals,
antioxidants, amino acids, and essential fatty acids
are often prescribed. Spirulina is a sea algae that is
frequently given to assist in eliminating heavy
metals. Lipotropic agents are certain vitamins and
nutrients that promote the flow of bile and fat from
the liver.
Many herbal supplements are used in detoxification therapies as well. Milk thistle extract, called silymarin, is one of the more potent herbs for detoxifying
the liver. Naturopathy, Ayurvedic medicine, and traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) recommend numerous herbal formulas for detoxification and immune
strengthening. If infections or parasites have been
found, these are treated with herbal formulas and, in
difficult cases, antibiotics.
For toxic bowel syndrome and digestive tract disorders, herbal laxatives and high fiber foods such as
psyllium seeds may be given to cleanse the digestive
tract and promote elimination. Colonics are used to
cleanse the lower intestines. Digestive enzymes are
prescribed to improve digestion, and acidophilus and
other friendly bacteria are reintroduced into the system with nutritional supplements.
Fasting is another major therapy in detoxification. Fasting is one of the quickest ways to promote
the elimination of stored toxins in the body and to
prompt the healing process. People with severe toxic
conditions are supervised closely during fasting
because the number of toxins in the body temporarily
increases as they are being released.
Chelation therapy is used by detoxification specialists to rid the body of heavy metals. Chelates are
particular substances that bind to heavy metals and
speed their elimination. Homeopathic remedies have
also been shown to be effective for removing heavy
metals.
Sweating therapies can also detoxify the body
because the skin is a major organ of elimination.
Sweating helps release those toxins that are stored
in the subcutaneous (under the skin) fat cells.
Saunas, therapeutic baths, and exercise are some of
these treatments. Body therapies may also be prescribed, including massage therapy, acupressure,
shiatsu, manual lymph drainage, and polarity therapy. These body therapies seek to improve circulatory and structural problems, reduce stress, and
promote healing responses in the body. Mind/body
therapies such as psychotherapy, counseling, and
stress management techniques may be used to heal
the psychological components of illness and to help
patients overcome their negative patterns contributing to illness.
Practitioners and treatment costs
The costs of detoxification therapies can vary
widely, depending on the number of tests and treatments required. Detoxification treatments can be
lengthy and involved since illnesses associated with
toxic conditions usually develop over many years
and may not clear up quickly. Detoxification treatments may be lengthy because they often strive
for the holistic healing of the body, mind, and
emotions.
Practitioners may be conventionally trained
medical doctors with specialties in environmental
medicine or interests in alternative treatment. The
majority of detoxification therapists are alternative
practitioners, such as naturopaths, homeopaths,
ayurvedic doctors, or traditional Chinese doctors.
Insurance coverage varies, depending on the practitioner and the treatment involved. Consumers
should review their individual insurance policies
regarding treatment coverage.
Preparations
Patients can assist diagnosis and treatment by
keeping detailed diaries of their activities, symptoms,
and contact with environmental factors that may be
affecting their health. Reducing exposure to
environmental toxins and making immediate dietary
and lifestyle changes may speed the detoxification
process.
Side effects
During the detoxification process, patients may
experience side effects of fatigue, malaise, aches and
pains, emotional duress, acne, headaches, allergies,
and symptoms of colds and flu. Detoxification specialists claim that these negative side effects are part of
the healing process. These reactions are sometimes
called healing crises, which are caused by temporarily
increased levels of toxins in the body due to elimination and cleansing.
Research and general acceptance
Although environmental medicine is gaining more
respect within conventional medicine, detoxification
treatmentis scarcelymentioned by themedical establishment.The research that exists on detoxificationislargely
testimonial, consisting of individual personal accounts
of healing without statistics or controlled scientific
experiments. In the alternative medical community,
detoxification is an essential and widely accepted treatment for many illnesses and chronic conditions.