Definition
The nasal septum is a thin structure, separating
the two sides of the nose. If it is not in the middle of the
nose, then it is deviated.
Description
The nasal septum is composed of two parts.
Toward the back of the head the nasal septum is
rigid bone, but further forward the bone becomes
cartilage. With one finger in each nostril this cartilage
can easily be bent back and forth. If the nasal septum
is sufficiently displaced to one side, it will impede the
flow of air and mucus through the nose. This condition, called a deviated septum, can cause symptoms
and disease.
Causes and symptoms
A deviated septum can be a simple variation in
normal structure or the result of a broken nose. Any
narrowing of the nasal passageway that it causes will
threaten the drainage of secretions from the sinuses,
which must pass through the nose. It is a general rule of
medicine that when flow is obstructed, whether it is
mucus from the sinuses or bile from the gall bladder,
infection results. People with allergic rhinitis (hay fever)
are at greater risk of obstruction because their nasal
passageways are already narrowed by the swollen
membranes lining them. The result is sinusitis, which
can be acute and severe or chronic and lingering.
Diagnosis
It is easy to see that a septum is deviated. It is more
difficult to determine if that deviation needs correction. It is common for a patient to complain that he/
she can breathe through only one nostril. Then the
diagnosis is easy. A deviated septum may also contribute to snoring, sleep apnea, and other breathing
disorders.
Treatment
The definitive treatment is surgical repositioning
of the septum, accomplished by breaking it loose and
fixing it in a proper place while it heals. Decongestants
like pseudoephedrine or phenylpropanolamine will
shrink the membranes and thereby enlarge the passages. Antihistamines, nasal cortisone spray, and other
allergy treatments may also be temporarily beneficial.
Alternative treatment
As a palliative, saline drops and sprays are very
helpful in loosening mucus in the obstructed side
and preventing drying in the other side, where all
the air blows. Hot peppers, such as jalapenos, can
produce enough tears and discharge to flush out a
stopped-up nose. An even more effective treatment
is called a nasal lavage, often done using a small
pot with a spout. Saline solution is poured into one
nostril and allowed to flow out the other nostril.
Then, the process is repeated in reverse. These
therapies are all useful to take care of symptoms,
but do not correct the problem. Nasospecific, a
procedure where a deflated balloon is inserted in
the nostril and inflated to a large enough degree to
adjust the septal deviation, can be an alternative to
surgery. A trained practitioner in the nasospecific
procedure is necessary.Prognosis
Surgical repair is curative and carries little risk.
Chronic infection can be painful and lead to complications until it is resolved. If there is continued obstruction, the infection will very likely return.
Prevention
Avoidance of virus colds, airborne dusts, air pollution, and known allergens will minimize the irritation
and swelling of the membranes lining the nasal passages