Definition
Diabetic neuropathy is a nerve disorder caused by
diabetes mellitus. Diabetic neuropathy may be diffuse,
affecting several parts of the body, or focal, affecting a
specific nerve and part of the body.
Description
The nervous system consists of two major divisions: the central nervous systems (CNS) which
includes the brain, the cranial nerves, and the spinal
cord, and the peripheral nervous system (PNS) which
includes the nerves that link the CNS with the sensory
organs, muscles, blood vessels, and glands of the body.
These peripheral nerves are either motor, meaning
that they are involved in motor activity such as walking, or sensory, meaning that they carry sensory information back to the CNS. The PNS also works with the
CNS to regulate involuntary (autonomic) processes
such as breathing, heartbeat, blood pressure, etc.
There are two types of diffuse diabetic neuropathy
that affect different nervous system functions. Diffuse
peripheral neuropathy primarily affects the limbs,
damaging the nerves of the feet and hands.
Autonomic neuropathy is the other form of diffuse
neuropathy and it affects the heart and other internal
organs.
Focal—or localized—diabetic neuropathy affects
specific nerves,most commonlyin the torso,leg, or head.
Diabetic neuropathy can lead to muscular weakness, loss of feeling or sensation, and loss of autonomic functions such as digestion, erection, bladder
control, and sweating among others.
The longer a person has diabetes, the more likely
the development of one or more forms of neuropathy.
Approximately 60–70% of patients with diabetes have
neuropathy, but only about 5% will experience painful symptoms.
Causes and symptoms
The exact cause of diabetic neuropathy is not
known. Researchers believe that the process of nerve
damage is related to high glucose concentrations in the
blood that could cause chemical changes in nerves,
disrupting their ability to effectively send messages.
High blood glucose is also known to damage the
blood vessels that carry oxygen and other nutrients
to the nerves. In addition, some people may have a
genetic predisposition to develop neuropathy.
There is a wide range of symptoms associated with
diabetic neuropathy, and they depend on which nerves
and parts of the body are affected and also on the type
of neuropathy present. Some patients have very mild
symptoms, while others are severely disabled.
Common symptoms of diffuse peripheral neuropathy include:
 numbness and feelings of tingling or burning
 insensitivity to pain
 needle-like jabs of pain
 extreme sensitivity to touch
 loss of balance and coordination
Common symptoms of diffuse autonomic neuropathy include:
 impaired urination and sexual function
 bladder infections
 stomach disorders, due to the impaired ability of the
stomach to empty (gastric stasis)
 nausea, vomiting and bloating
 dizziness, lightheadedness, and fainting spells
 loss of appetite
Common symptoms of focal neuropathy include:
 pain in the front of a thigh
 severe pain in the lower back
 pain in the chest or stomach
 ache behind an eye
 double vision
 paralysis on one side of the face
In severe diabetic neuropathy loss of sensation
can lead to injuries that are unnoticed, progressing to
infections, ulceration and possibly amputation.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of neuropathy is based on the
symptoms that present during a physical exam. Pain
assessment is usually the first step. Patients may have
more than one type of pain, and the history helps the
doctor determine whether a the pain has a neuropathic
cause.
The exam may include:
 a screening test for lost sensation
 nerve conduction studies to check the flow of electric
current through a nerve
 electromyography (EMG) to see how well muscles
respond to electrical impulses transmitted by nearby
nerves.
 ultrasound to show how the bladder and other parts
of the urinary tract are functioning
 sometimes a nerve biopsy may be performed.
Specialists who treat diabetic neuropathy include:
 neurologists: specialists in nervous system disorders
 urologists: specialists in urinary tract disorder
 gastroenterologists: specialists in digestive disorders
 podiatrists: specialists in caring for the feet
Treatment
Treatment of diabetic neuropathy is usually
focused on treating the symptoms associated with the
neuropathy and addressing the underlying cause by
improving the control of blood sugar levels, which
may heal the early stages of neuropathy.
There is no cure for the permanent nerve damage
caused by neuropathy. To help control pain, the choice
of proven drug therapies has broadened during the past
decade. Pain medication, such as the topical skin cream
capsaicin, is usually no stronger than codeine because of
the potential for addiction with long-term use of such
drugs. Four main classes of drugs are available for pain
management, alone or in combination: tricyclic antidepressants (Imipramine, Nortriptyline), narcotic analgesics (Morphine), anticonvulsants (Carbamazepine,
Gabapentin), and antiarrhythmics.
Prognosis
Early stage diabetic neuropathy can usually be
reversed with good glucose control. Once nerve damage has occurred it cannot be reversed. The prognosis is largely dependent on the management of the
underlying condition, diabetes, which may halt the
progression of the neuropathy and improve symptoms. Recovery, if it occurs, is slow.
Prevention
Tight glucose control and the avoidance of alcohol and cigarettes help protect nerves from damage