Definition
Diabetic foot infections are infections that can
develop in the skin, muscles, or bones of the foot as a
result of the nerve damage and poor circulation that is
associated with diabetes.
Description
People who have diabetes have a greater-thanaverage chance of developing foot infections.
Because a person who has diabetes may not feel foot
pain or discomfort, problems can remain undetected
until fever, weakness, or other signs of systemic infection appear. As a result, even minor irritations occur
more often, heal more slowly, and are more likely to
result in serious health problems.
With diabetes, foot infections occur more frequently because the disease causes nervous system
changes and poor circulation. Because the nerves
that control sweating no longer work, the skin of
the feet can become very dry and cracked, and
calluses tend to occur more frequently and build
up faster. If not trimmed regularly, these calluses
can turn into open sores or ulcers. Because diabetic
nerve damage can cause a loss of sensation (neuropathy), if the feet are not regularly inspected, an
ulcer can quickly become infected and, if not treated, may result in the death of tissue (gangrene) or
amputation.
The risk of infection is greatest for people who are
over the age of 60 and for those who have one or more
of the following:
 poorly controlled diabetes
 foot ulcers
 laser treatment for changes in the retina
 kidney or vascular disease
 loss of sensation (neuropathy)
Causes and symptoms
Bacteria can cause an infection through small
cracks (fissures) that can develop in the dry skin
around the heel and on other parts of the foot or
through corns, calluses, blisters, hangnails, or ulcers.
If not treated, the bacterial infection can destroy skin,
tissue, and bone or spread throughout the body.
Common sites of diabetic foot infections include
the following:
 blisters, corns, or callouses that bleed beneath the skin
 bunions, hammertoes, or other abnormalities in the
bones of the foot
 scar tissue that has grown over the site of an earlier
infection
 foot ulcers caused by pressure, nerve damage, or
poor circulation (Ulcers occur most often over the
ball of the foot, on the bottom of the big toe, or on
the sides of the foot due to poorly fitting shoes.)
 injuries that tear or puncture the skin
Diagnosis
A physician who specializes in the treatment of the
foot (podiatrist) or the doctor who normally treats the
patient’s diabetes will treat the infection. An x ray of
the foot will be taken to determine whether the bone
has become infected. A sample from the wound will
be cultured to identify the organism that is causing the
infection so that the appropriate antibiotic can
be selected.
Treatment
From the results of the culture, the appropriate
antibiotic will be prescribed. Any dead or infected
tissue will be surgically removed and, if necessary, a
cast and/or special shoes may be used to protect the
area. In addition, the patient will be instructed to keep
off their feet. If the ulcer does not heal, the physician
may perform surgery to increase blood flow to the
foot. It is also important for the patient to practice
good diabetes control and keep blood glucose levels
from getting too high.
Alternative treatment
Acupuncture and vitamin C can boost the body’s
infection-fighting ability. A variety of other vitamins
and herbs may improve general health and diabetes
control. Because diabetes is a potentially deadly disease, it can be dangerous to try alternative approaches
without a doctor’s approval or without consulting a
trained practitioner of alternative medicine.
Prognosis
Without proper treatment, diabetic foot infections can lead to serious illness, gangrene, amputation,
and even death if the infection spreads throughout the
body. If treated properly and the patient practices
good foot care, the prognosis is generally optimistic.
Prevention
There are many things that a diabetic individual
can do to prevent the occurrence of foot infections,
including the following:
 control blood glucose and do not allow it to get too high
 avoid smoking
 keep blood pressure and cholesterol under control
 exercise to stimulate blood flow
 keep feet clean, dry, and warm
 check your feet every day for blisters, scratches, and
skin that is hard, broken, inflamed, or feels hot or
cold when touched
 after bathing, carefully dry feet and apply thin coat
of petroleum jelly or hand cream to prevent dry skin
from cracking
 use a pumice stone and emery board to trim calluses
 do not neglect an ulcer, should one develop