Definition
Diabetic ketoacidosis is a dangerous complication
of diabetes mellitus in which the chemical balance of
the body becomes far too acidic.
Description
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) always results from
a severe insulin deficiency. Insulin is the hormone
secreted by the body to lower the blood sugar levels
when they become too high. Diabetes mellitus is the
disease resulting from the inability of the body to
produce or respond properly to insulin, required by
the body to convert glucose to energy. In childhood
diabetes, DKA complications represent the leading
cause of death, mostly due to the accumulation of
abnormally large amounts of fluid in the brain (cerebral edema). DKA combines three major features:
hyperglycemia, meaning excessively high blood sugar
kevels; hyperketonemia, meaning an overproduction
of ketones by the body; and acidosis, meaning that the
blood has become too acidic.
Insulin deficiency is responsible for all three conditions: the body glucose goes largely unused since
most cells are unable to transport glucose into the
cell without the presence of insulin; this condition
makes the body use stored fat as an alternative source
instead of the unavailable glucose for energy, a process
that produces acidic ketones, which build up because
they require insulin to be broken down. The presence
of excess ketones in the bloodstream in turn causes the
blood to become more acidic than the body tissues,
which creates a toxic condition.
Causes and symptoms
DKA is most commonly seen in individuals with
type I diabetes, under 19 years of age and is usually
caused by theinterruption of theirinsulin treatment or by
acuteinfection or trauma.A small number of people with
type II diabetes also experience ketoacidosis, but this is
rare given the fact that type IIdiabetics stillproduce some
insulin naturally. When DKA occurs in type II patients,
it is usually caused by a decrease in food intake and an
increased insulin deficiency due to hyperglycemia.
Some common DKA symptoms include:
 high blood sugar levels
 frequent urination (polyuria) and thirst
 fatigue and lethargy
 nausea
 vomiting
 abdominal pain
 fruity odor to breath
 rapid, deep breathing
 muscle stiffness or aching
 coma
Diagnosis
Diagnosis requires the demonstration of hyperglycemia, hyperketonemia, and acidosis. DKA is
established if the patient’s urine or blood is strongly
positive for glucose and ketones. Normal glucose
levels in a non-diabetic person on average range from
80–110 mg/dl. A person with diabetes will typically
fluctuate outside those parameters. DKA glucose
levels exceed 250 mg/dl and can reach 400 to 800 mg/
dL. A low serum bicarbonate level (usually below 15
mEq/L) is also present, indicative of acidosis.
A blood test or urinalysis can quickly determine
the concentration of glucose in the bloodstream. Test
strips are available to patients commercially can submerge in urine to detect the presence or concentration
of ketones.
Treatment
Ketoacidosis is treated under medical supervision
and usually in a hospital setting.
Basic treatment includes:
 administering insulin to correct the hyperglycemia
and hyperketonemia
 replacing fluids lost through excessive urination and
vomiting intravenously
 balancing electrolytes to re-establish the chemical
equilibrium of the blood and prevent potassium deficiency (hypokalemia) during treatment
 treatment for any associated bacterial infection
Prognosis
With proper medical attention, DKA is almost
always successfully treated. The DKA mortality rate is
about 10%. Coma on admission adversely affects the
prognosis. The major causes of death are circulatory
collapse, hypokalemia, infection, and cerebral edema.
Prevention
Once diabetes has been diagnosed, prevention measures to avoid DKA include regular monitoring of
blood glucose, administration of insulin, and lifestyle
maintenance. Glucose monitoring is especially important during periods of stress, infection, and trauma when
glucose concentrations typically increase as a response
to these situations. Ketone tests should also be performed during these periods or when glucose is elevated.