Definition
Diabetes mellitus is a condition in which the pancreas no longer produces enough insulin or cells stop
responding to the insulin that is produced, so that
glucose in the blood cannot be absorbed into the
cells of the body. Symptoms include frequent urination, lethargy, excessive thirst, and hunger. The treatment includes changes in diet, oral medications, and in
some cases, daily injections of insulin.
Description
Diabetes mellitus is a chronic disease that causes
serious health complications including renal (kidney)
failure, heart disease, stroke, and blindness.
Approximately 17 million Americans have diabetes.
Unfortunately, as many as one-half are unaware they
have it.
Background
Every cell in the human body needs energy in
order to function. The body’s primary energy source
is glucose, a simple sugar resulting from the digestion
of foods containing carbohydrates (sugars and
starches). Glucose from the digested food circulates
in the blood as a ready energy source for any cells that
need it. Insulin is a hormone or chemical produced by
cells in the pancreas, an organ located behind the
stomach. Insulin bonds to a receptor site on the outside of cell and acts like a key to open a doorway into
the cell through which glucose can enter. Some of the
glucose can be converted to concentrated energy
sources like glycogen or fatty acids and saved for
later use. When there is not enough insulin produced
or when the doorway no longer recognizes the insulin
key, glucose stays in the blood rather entering the cells.
The body will attempt to dilute the high level of
glucose in the blood, a condition called hyperglycemia, by drawing water out of the cells and into the
bloodstream in an effort to dilute the sugar and excrete
it in the urine. It is not unusual for people with undiagnosed diabetes to be constantly thirsty, drink large
quantities of water, and urinate frequently as their
bodies try to get rid of the extra glucose. This creates
high levels of glucose in the urine.
At the same time that the body is trying to get rid
of glucose from the blood, the cells are starving for
glucose and sending signals to the body to eat more
food, thus making patients extremely hungry. To
provide energy for the starving cells, the body also
tries to convert fats and proteins to glucose. The
breakdown of fats and proteins for energy causes
acid compounds called ketones to form in the blood.
Ketones also will be excreted in the urine. As ketones
build up in the blood, a condition called ketoacidosis
can occur. This condition can be life threatening if left
untreated, leading to coma and death.
Types of diabetes mellitus
Type I diabetes, sometimes called juvenile diabetes, begins most commonly in childhood or adolescence. In this form of diabetes, the body produces little
or no insulin. It is characterized by a sudden onset and
occurs more frequently in populations descended from
Northern European countries (Finland, Scotland,
Scandinavia) than in those from Southern European
countries, the Middle East, or Asia. In the United
States, approximately three people in 1,000 develop
Type I diabetes. This form also is called insulin-dependent diabetes because people who develop this type
need to have daily injections of insulin.
Brittle diabetics are a subgroup of Type I where
patients have frequent and rapid swings of blood sugar
levels between hyperglycemia (a condition where there
is too much glucose or sugar in the blood) and hypoglycemia (a condition where there are abnormally low
levels of glucose or sugar in the blood). These patients
may require several injections of different types of
insulin during the day to keep the blood sugar level
within a fairly normal range.
The more common form of diabetes, Type II,
occurs in approximately 3–5% of Americans under
50 years of age, and increases to 10–15% in those
over 50. More than 90% of the diabetics in the
United States are Type II diabetics. Sometimes called
age-onset or adult-onset diabetes, this form of diabetes occurs most often in people who are overweight
and who do not exercise. It is also more common in
people of Native American, Hispanic, and AfricanAmerican descent. People who have migrated to
Western cultures from East India, Japan, and
Australian Aboriginal cultures also are more likely to
develop Type II diabetes than those who remain in
their original countries.
Type II is considered a milder form of diabetes
because of its slow onset (sometimes developing over
the course of several years) and because it usually can
be controlled with diet and oral medication. The
consequences of uncontrolled and untreated Type II
diabetes, however, are the just as serious as those for
Type I. This form is also called noninsulin-dependent
diabetes, a term that is somewhat misleading. Many
people with Type II diabetes can control the condition
with diet and oral medications, however, insulin injections are sometimes necessary if treatment with diet
and oral medication is not working.
Another form of diabetes called gestational diabetes can develop during pregnancy and generally
resolves after the baby is delivered. This diabetic condition develops during the second or third trimester of
pregnancy in about 2% of pregnancies. In 2004, incidence of gestational diabetes were reported to have
increased 35% in 10 years. Children of women with
gestational diabetes are more likely to be born prematurely, have hypoglycemia, or have severe jaundice at
birth. The condition usually is treated by diet, however, insulin injections may be required. These women
who have diabetes during pregnancy are at higher risk
for developing Type II diabetes within 5–10 years.
Diabetes also can develop as a result of pancreatic
disease, alcoholism, malnutrition, or other severe illnesses that stress the body.
Causes and symptoms
Causes
The causes of diabetes mellitus are unclear, however, there seem to be both hereditary (genetic factors
passed on in families) and environmental factors
involved. Research has shown that some people who
develop diabetes have common genetic markers. In
Type I diabetes, the immune system, the body’s
defense system against infection, is believed to be triggered by a virus or another microorganism that
destroys cells in the pancreas that produce insulin. In
Type II diabetes, age, obesity, and family history of
diabetes play a role.
In Type II diabetes, the pancreas may produce
enough insulin, however, cells have become resistant to
the insulin produced and it may not work as effectively.
Symptoms of Type II diabetes can begin so gradually
that a person may not know that he or she has it. Early
signs are lethargy, extreme thirst, and frequent urination. Other symptoms may include sudden weight loss,
slow wound healing, urinary tract infections, gum disease, or blurred vision. It is not unusual for Type II
diabetes to be detected while a patient is seeing a doctor
about another health concern that is actually being
caused by the yet undiagnosed diabetes.
Individuals who are at high risk of developing
Type II diabetes mellitus include people who:
 are obese (more than 20% above their ideal body
weight)
 have a relative with diabetes mellitus
 belong to a high-risk ethnic population (AfricanAmerican, Native American, Hispanic, or Native
Hawaiian)
 have been diagnosed with gestational diabetes or
have delivered a baby weighing more than 9 lbs (4 kg)
 have high blood pressure (140/90 mmHg or above)
 have a high density lipoprotein cholesterol level less
than or equal to 35 mg/dL and/or a triglyceride level
greater than or equal to 250 mg/dL
 have had impaired glucose tolerance or impaired
fasting glucose on previous testing
Several common medications can impair the
body’s use of insulin, causing a condition known as
secondary diabetes. These medications include treatments for high blood pressure (furosemide, clonidine,
and thiazide diuretics), drugs with hormonal activity
(oral contraceptives, thyroid hormone, progestins, and
glucocorticorids), and the anti-inflammation drug
indomethacin. Several drugs that are used to treat
mood disorders (such as anxiety and depression) also
can impair glucose absorption. These drugs include
haloperidol, lithium carbonate, phenothiazines,
tricyclic antidepressants, and adrenergic agonists.
Other medications that can cause diabetes symptoms
include isoniazid, nicotinic acid, cimetidine, and
heparin. A 2004 study found that low levels of the
essential mineral chromium in the body may be linked
to increased risk for diseases associated with insulin
resistance.
Symptoms
Symptoms of diabetes can develop suddenly (over
days or weeks) in previously healthy children or adolescents, or can develop gradually (over several years)
in overweight adults over the age of 40. The classic
symptoms include feeling tired and sick, frequent
urination, excessive thirst, excessive hunger, and
weight loss.
Ketoacidosis, a conditiondue tostarvationor uncontrolled diabetes, is common in Type I diabetes. Ketones
are acid compounds that form in the blood when the
body breaks down fats and proteins. Symptoms include
abdominal pain, vomiting, rapid breathing, extreme
lethargy, and drowsiness. Patients with ketoacidosis will
also have a sweet breath odor. Left untreated, this condition can lead to coma and death.
With Type II diabetes, the condition may not
become evident until the patient presents for medical
treatment for some other condition. A patient may
have heart disease, chronic infections of the gums
and urinary tract, blurred vision, numbness in the feet
and legs, or slow-healing wounds. Women may experience genital itching.
Diagnosis
Diabetes is suspected based on symptoms. Urine
tests and blood tests can be used to confirm a diagnose
of diabetes based on the amount of glucose found.
Urine can also detect ketones and protein in the
urine that may help diagnose diabetes and assess
how well the kidneys are functioning. These tests also
can be used to monitor the disease once the patient is
on a standardized diet, oral medications, or insulin.
Urine tests
Clinistix and Diastix are paper strips or dipsticks
that change color when dipped in urine. The test strip
is compared to a chart that shows the amount of
glucose in the urine based on the change in color.
The level of glucose in the urine lags behind the level
of glucose in the blood. Testing the urine with a test
stick, paper strip, or tablet that changes color when
sugar is present is not as accurate as blood testing,
however it can give a fast and simple reading.
Ketones in the urine can be detected using similar
types of dipstick tests (Acetest or Ketostix).
Ketoacidosis can be a life-threatening situation in Type
I diabetics, so having a quick and simple test to detect
ketones can assist in establishing a diagnosis sooner.
Another dipstick test can determine the presence
of protein or albumin in the urine. Protein in the urine
can indicate problems with kidney function and can be
used to track the development of renal failure. A more
sensitive test for urine protein uses radioactively
tagged chemicals to detect microalbuminuria, small
amounts of protein in the urine, that may not show
up on dipstick tests.
Blood tests
FASTING GLUCOSE TEST. Blood is drawn from a
vein in the patient’s arm after a period at least eight
hours when the patient has not eaten, usually in the
morning before breakfast. The red blood cells are
separated from the sample and the amount of glucose
is measured in the remaining plasma. A plasma level of
7.8 mmol/L (200 mg/L) or greater can indicate diabetes. The fasting glucose test is usually repeated on
another day to confirm the results.
POSTPRANDIAL GLUCOSE TEST. Blood is taken
right after the patient has eaten a meal.
ORAL GLUCOSE TOLERANCE TEST. Blood samples
are taken from a vein before and after a patient drinks
a thick, sweet syrup of glucose and other sugars. In a
non-diabetic, the level of glucose in the blood goes up
immediately after the drink and then decreases gradually as insulin is used by the body to metabolize, or
absorb, the sugar. In a diabetic, the glucose in the
blood goes up and stays high after drinking the sweetened liquid. A plasma glucose level of 11.1 mmol/L
(200 mg/dL) or higher at two hours after drinking the
syrup and at one other point during the two-hour test
period confirms the diagnosis of diabetes.
A diagnosis of diabetes is confirmed if there are
symptoms of diabetes and a plasma glucose level of at
least 11.1 mmol/L, a fasting plasma glucose level of at
least 7 mmol/L; or a two-hour plasma glucose level
of at least 11.1 mmol/L during an oral glucose tolerance test.
Home blood glucose monitoring kits are available
so patients with diabetes can monitor their own levels.
A small needle or lancet is used to prick the finger and
a drop of blood is collected and analyzed by a monitoring device. Some patients may test their blood glucose levels several times during a day and use this
information to adjust their doses of insulin.
Treatment
There is currently no cure for diabetes. The condition, however, can be managed so that patients can
live a relatively normal life. Treatment of diabetes
focuses on two goals: keeping blood glucose within
normal range and preventing the development of longterm complications. Careful monitoring of diet,
exercise, and blood glucose levels are as important as
the use of insulin or oral medications in preventing
complications of diabetes. In 2003, the American
Diabetes Association updated its Standards of Care
for the management of diabetes. These standards help
manage health care providers in the most recent
recommendations for diagnosis and treatment of the
disease.
Dietary changes
Diet and moderate exercise are the first treatments
implemented in diabetes. For many Type II diabetics,
weight loss may be an important goal in helping them
to control their diabetes. A well-balanced, nutritious
diet provides approximately 50–60% of calories from
carbohydrates, approximately 10–20% of calories
from protein, and less than 30% of calories from fat.
The number of calories required by an individual
depends on age, weight, and activity level. The calorie
intake also needs to be distributed over the course of
the entire day so surges of glucose entering the blood
system are kept to a minimum.
Keeping track of the number of calories provided
by different foods can become complicated, so
patients usually are advised to consult a nutritionist
or dietitian. An individualized, easy to manage diet
plan can be set up for each patient. Both the American
Diabetes Association and the American Dietetic
Association recommend diets based on the use of
food exchange lists. Each food exchange contains a
known amount of calories in the form of protein, fat,
or carbohydrate. A patient’s diet plan will consist of a
certain number of exchanges from each food category
(meat or protein, fruits, breads and starches, vegetables, and fats) to be eaten at meal times and as snacks.
Patients have flexibility in choosing which foods they
eat as long as they stick with the number of exchanges
prescribed.
For many Type II diabetics, weight loss is an
important factor in controlling their condition. The
food exchange system, along with a plan of moderate
exercise, can help them lose excess weight and improve
their overall health.
Oral medications
Oral medications are available to lower blood glucose in Type II diabetics. In 1990, 23.4 outpatient prescriptions for oral antidiabetic agents were dispensed.
By 2001, the number had increased to 91.8 million prescriptions. Oral antidiabetic agents accounted for more
than $5 billion dollars in worldwide retail sales per year
in the early twenty-first century and were the fastestgrowing segment of diabetes drugs. The drugs first prescribed for Type II diabetes are in a class of compounds
called sulfonylureas and include tolbutamide, tolazamide, acetohexamide, and chlorpropamide. Newer
drugs in the same class are now available and include
glyburide, glimeperide, and glipizide. How these drugs
work is not well understood, however, they seem to
stimulate cells of the pancreas to produce more insulin.
New medications that are available to treat diabetes
include metformin, acarbose, and troglitizone. The
choice of medication depends in part on the individual
patient profile. All drugs have side effects thatmay make
them inappropriate for particular patients. Some for
example, may stimulate weight gain or cause stomach
irritation, so they may not be the best treatment for
someone who is already overweight or who has stomach
ulcers. Others, like metformin, have been shown to have
positive effects such as reduced cardiovascular mortality, but butincreased riskin other situations.While these
medications are an important aspect of treatment for
Type II diabetes, they are not a substitute for a well
planned diet and moderate exercise. Oral medications
have not been shown effective for Type I diabetes, in
which the patient produces little or no insulin.
Constant advances are being made in development of new oral medications for persons with diabetes. In 2003, a drug called Metaglip combining
glipizide and metformin was approved in a dingle
tablet. Along with diet and exercise, the drug was
used as initial therapy for Type 2 diabetes. Another
drug approved by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) combines metformin and rosiglitazone (Avandia), a medication that increases muscle cells’ sensitivity to insulin. It is marketed under the
name Avandamet. So many new drugs are under
development that it is best to stay in touch with a
physician for the latest information; physicians can
find the best drug, diet and exercise program to fit an
individual patient’s need.
Insulin
Patients with Type I diabetes need daily injections
of insulin to help their bodies use glucose. The amount
and type of insulin required depends on the height,
weight, age, food intake, and activity level of the individual diabetic patient. Some patients with Type II
diabetes may need to use insulin injections if their
diabetes cannot be controlled with diet, exercise, and
oral medication. Injections are given subcutaneously,
that is, just under the skin, using a small needle and
syringe. Injection sites can be anywhere on the body
where there is looser skin, including the upper arm,
abdomen, or upper thigh.
Purified human insulin is most commonly used,
however, insulin from beef and pork sources also are
available. Insulin may be given as an injection of a single
dose of one type of insulin once a day. Different types of
insulin can be mixed and given in one dose or split into
two or more doses during a day. Patients who require
multiple injections over the course of a day may be able
to use an insulin pump that administers small doses of
insulin on demand. The small battery-operated pump is
worn outside the body and is connected to a needle that
is inserted into the abdomen. Pumps can be programmed to inject small doses of insulin at various
times during the day, or the patient may be able to adjust
the insulin doses to coincide with meals and exercise.
Regular insulin is fast-acting and starts to work
within 15–30 minutes, with its peak glucose-lowering
effect about two hours after it is injected. Its effects last
for about four to six hours. NPH (neutral protamine
Hagedorn) and Lente insulin are intermediate-acting,
starting to work within one to three hours and lasting
up to 18–26 hours. Ultra-lente is a long-acting form of
insulin that starts to work within four to eight hours
and lasts 28–36 hours.
Hypoglycemia, or low blood sugar, can be caused
by too much insulin, too little food (or eating too late to
coincide with the action of the insulin), alcohol consumption, or increased exercise. A patient with symptoms of hypoglycemia may be hungry, cranky,
confused, and tired. The patient may become sweaty
and shaky. Left untreated, the patient can lose consciousness or have a seizure. This condition is sometimes called an insulin reaction and should be treated by
giving the patient something sweet to eat or drink like a
candy, sugar cubes, juice, or another high sugar snack.
Surgery
Transplantation of a healthy pancreas into a diabetic patient is a successful treatment, however, this
transplant is usually done only if a kidney transplant is
performed at the same time. Although a pancreas
transplant is possible, it is not clear if the potential
benefits outweigh the risks of the surgery and drug
therapy needed.
Alternative treatment
Since diabetes can be life-threatening if not properly managed, patients should not attempt to treat this
condition without medicial supervision. A variety of
alternative therapies can be helpful in managing the
symptoms of diabetes and supporting patients with
the disease. Acupuncture can help relieve the pain
associated with diabetic neuropathy by stimulation of
cetain points. A qualified practitioner should be consulted. Herbal remedies also may be helpful in managing diabetes. Although there is no herbal substitute
for insulin, some herbs may help adjust blood sugar
levels or manage other diabetic symptoms. Some
options include:
 fenugreek (Trigonella foenum-graecum) has been
shown in some studies to reduce blood insulin and
glucose levels while also lowering cholesterol
 bilberry (Vaccinium myrtillus) may lower blood glucose levels, as well as helping to maintain healthy
blood vessels
 garlic (Allium sativum) may lower blood sugar and
cholesterol levels
 onions (Allium cepa) may help lower blood glucose
levels by freeing insulin to metabolize them
 cayenne pepper (Capsicum frutescens) can help
relieve pain in the peripheral nerves (a type of diabetic neuropathy)
 gingko (Gingko biloba) may maintain blood flow to
the retina, helping to prevent diabetic retinopathy
Any therapy that lowers stress levels also can be
useful in treating diabetes by helping to reduce insulin
requirements. Among the alternative treatments that
aim to lower stress are hypnotherapy, biofeedback,
and meditation.
Prognosis
Uncontrolled diabetes is a leading cause of blindness, end-stage renal disease, and limb amputations. It
also doubles the risks of heart disease and increases the
risk of stroke. Eye problems including cataracts, glaucoma, and diabetic retinopathy also are more common
in diabetics.
Diabetic peripheral neuropathy is a condition where
nerve endings, particularly in the legs and feet, become
less sensitive. Diabetic foot ulcers are a particular problem since the patient does not feel the pain of a blister,
callous, or other minor injury. Poor blood circulation in
the legs and feet contribute to delayed wound healing.
The inability to sense pain along with the complications
of delayed wound healing can result in minor injuries,
blisters, or callouses becoming infected and difficult to
treat. In cases of severe infection, the infected tissue
begins to break down and rot away. The most serious
consequence of this condition is the need for amputation
of toes, feet, or legs due to severe infection.
Heart disease and kidney disease are common
complications of diabetes. Long-term complications
may include the need for kidney dialysis or a kidney
transplant due to kidney failure.
Babies born to diabetic mothers have an increased
risk of birth defects and distress at birth.
Prevention
Research continues on diabetes prevention and
improved detection of those at risk for developing
diabetes. While the onset of Type I diabetes is
unpredictable, the risk of developing Type II diabetes
can be reduced by maintaining ideal weight and exercising regularly. The physical and emotional stress of
surgery, illness, pregnancy, and alcoholism can
increase the risks of diabetes, so maintaining a healthy
lifestyle is critical to preventing the onset of Type II
diabetes and preventing further complications of the
disease.