Definition
Dermatitis of the buttocks, genitals, lower abdomen, or thigh folds of an infant or toddler is commonly referred to as diaper rash.
Description
The outside layer of skin normally forms a
protective barrier that prevents infection. One of the
primary causes of dermatitis in the diaper area is
prolonged skin contact with wetness. Under these
circumstances, natural oils are stripped away, the
outer layer of skin is damaged, and there is increased
susceptibility to infection by bacteria or yeast.
Diaper rash is a term that covers a broad variety
of skin conditions that occur on the same area of the
body. Some babies are more prone to diaper rash than
others.
Causes and symptoms
Frequently a flat, red rash is caused by simple
chafing of the diaper against tender skin, initiating a
friction rash. This type of rash is not seen in the skin
folds. It may be more pronounced around the edges of
the diaper, at the waist and leg bands. The baby generally doesn’t appear to experience much discomfort.
Sometimes the chemicals or detergents in the diaper
are contributing factors and may result in contact
dermatitis. These rashes should clear up easily with
proper attention. Ignoring the condition may lead to a
secondary infection that is more difficult to resolve.
Friction of skin against itself can cause a rash in
the baby’s skin folds, called intertrigo. This rash
appears as reddened areas that may ooze and is often
uncomfortable when the diaper is wet. Intertrigo can
also be found on other areas of the body where there
are deep skin folds that tend to trap moisture.
Seborrheic dermatitis is the diaper area equivalent
of cradle cap. It is scaly and greasy in appearance and
may be worse in the folds of the skin.
Yeast, or candidal dermatitis, is the most common
infectious cause of diaper rash. The affected areas are
raised and quite red with distinct borders, and satellite
lesions may occur around the edges. Yeast is part of
the normal skin flora, and is often an opportunistic
invader when simple diaper rash is untreated. It is
particularly common after treatment with antibiotics,
which kill the good bacteria that normally keep the
yeast population in check. Usual treatments for diaper
rash will not clear it up. Repeated or difficult to
resolve episodes of yeast infection may warrant
further medical attention, since this is sometimes associated with diabetes or immune problems.
Another infectious cause of diaper rash is impetigo. This bacterial infection is characterized by blisters that ooze and crust.
Diagnosis
The presence of skin lesions in the diaper area
means that the baby has diaper rash. However, there
are several types of rash that may require specific
treatment in order to heal. It is useful to be able to
distinguish them by appearance as described above.
A baby with a rash that does not clear up within
two to three days or a rash with blisters or bleeding
should be seen by a healthcare professional for further
evaluation.
Treatment
Antibiotics are generally prescribed for rashes
caused by bacteria, particularly impetigo. This may
be a topical or oral formulation, depending on the
size of the area involved and the severity of the
infection.
Over-the-counter antifungal creams, such as
Lotrimin, are often recommended to treat a rash
resulting from yeast. If topical treatment is not effective, an oral antifungal may be prescribed.
Mild steroid creams, such as 0.5–1% hydrocortisone, can be used for seborrheic dermatitis and sometimes intertrigo. Prescription strength creams may be
needed for short-term treatment of more stubborn
cases.
Alternative treatment
Good diaper hygiene will prevent or clear up
many simple cases of diaper rash. Diapers should be
checked very frequently and changed as soon as they
are wet or soiled. Good air circulation is also important for healthy skin. Babies should have some time
without wearing a diaper, and a waterproof pad can be
used to protect the bed or other surface. Rubber pants,
or other occlusive fabrics, should not be used over the
diaper area. Some cloth-like disposable diapers promote better air circulation than plastic-type diapers. It
may be necessary for mothers to experiment with diaper types to see if the baby’s skin reacts better to cloth
or disposable ones. If disposable diapers are used, the
baby’s skin may react differently to various brands. If
the baby is wearing cloth diapers, they should be
washed in a mild detergent and double rinsed.
The diaper area should be cleaned with something
mild, even plain water. Some wipes contain alcohol or
chemicals that can be irritating for some babies. Plain
water may be the best cleansing substance when there
is a rash. Using warm water in a spray bottle (or giving
a quick bath) and then lightly patting the skin dry can
produce less skin trauma than using wipes. In the
event of suspected yeast, a tablespoon of cider vinegar
can be added to a cup of warm water and used as a
cleansing solution. This is dilute enough that it should
not burn, but acidifies the skin pH enough to hamper
the yeast growth.Barrier ointments can be valuable to treat rashes.
Those that contain zinc oxide are especially effective.
These creams and ointments protect already irritated
skin from the additional insult of urine and stool,
particularly if the baby has diarrhea. Cornstarch powder may be used on rashes that are moist, such as
impetigo.
Nutrition
What the baby eats can make a difference in stool
frequency and acidity. Typically, breast-fed babies will
have fewer problems with rashes. When adding a new
food to the diet, the baby should be observed closely to
see whether rashes are produced around the baby’s
mouth or anus. If this occurs, the new food should
be discontinued.
Babies who are taking antibiotics are more likely
to get rashes due to yeast. To help bring the good
bacterial counts back to normal, Lactobacillus bifidus
can be added to the diet. It is available in powder form
from most health food stores.
Herbal treatment
Some herbal preparations can be useful for diaper
rash. Calendula reduces inflammation, tightens tissues, and disinfects. It has been recommended for
seborrheic dermatitis as well as for general inflammation of the skin. The ointment should be applied at
each diaper change. Chickweed ointment can also be
soothing for irritated skin and may be applied once or
twice daily.
Prognosis
Treated appropriately, diaper rash will resolve
fairly quickly if there is no underlying health problem
or skin disease.
Prevention
Frequent diaper changes are important to keep
the skin dry and healthy. Application of powders
and ointments is not necessary when there is no rash.
Finding the best combination of cleansing and diapering products for the individual baby will also help to
prevent diaper rash.