Definition
Diaphragms are dome-shaped barrier methods of
contraception that block sperm from entering the
uterus. They are made of latex (rubber) and formed
like a shallow cup. Since vaginas vary in size, each
patient will need to be fitted by a doctor or nurse
with a diaphragm that conforms to the shape and
contour of the vagina as well as the strength of the
muscles in the vaginal walls. Diaphragms must be used
with spermicidal cream or jelly. The device should
cause no discomfort, and neither the woman nor her
partner should feel that it is there.
Purpose
The purpose of a diaphragm is to prevent access to
the womb (uterus) by the sperm and thus prevent
conception. The level of effectiveness is about 95%.
Precautions
Each client will undergo a physical examination
and a Pap smear. If these are normal, the physician
will fit the patient for the device and give instructions
on how to insert, remove, and clean the object. She will
also be taught the signs and symptoms of potential
complications.
Description
Prior to insertion, the inside of the dome and the
rim are covered with a thick layer (perhaps a tablespoon) of a spermicide that is compatible with the
diaphragm being used. The domed area covers the
opening into the uterus (cervix) and keeps the spermicide in place. As a result, any sperm that might get
under the diaphragm will be destroyed.
Diaphragms may be inserted two–three hours prior
to intercourse, and must be left in place for six to eight
hours following sexual relations. During this time the
woman may not swim, bathe, or douche, but she may
shower. If she desires to have intercourse again before
the six to eight hours have passed, the diaphragm
should not be removed. Instead, an applicator full of
spermicide should be deposited into the vagina.
A diaphragm will last for a year or more. It should
be examined weekly for holes. This can be done by
holding it up to the light or filling it with water.
Preparation
Before inserting the diaphragm, the woman
should empty her bladder and wash her hands with
soap and water. The device should be checked for
leaks by filling it with water or holding it up to the
light. A spermicidal jelly is then applied to the inside
and outside, and especially around the rim. While
standing with one foot elevated on a chair or step,
lying down, or squatting, the woman folds the diaphragm inward toward the middle and inserts it into
the vagina as far as it will go.
Aftercare
When removed, the diaphragm should be washed
with a mild soap and water. After being dried, it can be
dusted with corn starch before being returned to its
container. The diaphragm should always be stored
away from sunlight and heat in a cool, dry place. It
should not be washed with harsh or perfumed soaps or
used with perfumed powders because either of these
substances can damage the diaphragm.
Risks
Although rare, wearing the diaphragm longer
than the recommended time can result in toxic shock
syndrome. The signs and symptoms of this serious
illness include sudden onset of high fever, vomiting,
diarrhea, dizziness, faintness, weakness, aching muscles and joints, and rash. The doctor must be notified
immediately if any of these conditions appear. An
allergic reaction to the spermicide or the material
from which the device is made is also possible.
Diaphragm use is also associated with an increased
risk of bladder infections.
It should be noted that the diaphragm can become
dislodged during intercourse, which could result in an
unwanted pregnancy. To ensure a secure fit, a woman
should be examined for a refitting if she gains or loses
more than 10 lbs (4.5 kg), or after she gives birth.
Normal results
Consumers can expect an efficiency rate of about
95% in preventing pregnancy. Using a male condom in
conjunction with the diaphragm decreases the potential for pregnancy. Diaphragms provide no protection
against AIDS or other sexually transmitted diseases.