Definition
To most individuals, diarrhea means an increased
frequency or decreased consistency of bowel movements; however, the medical definition is more exact
than this. In many developed countries, the average
number of bowel movements is three per day.
However, researchers have found that diarrhea best
correlates with an increase in stool weight; stool
weights above 10oz (300 gs) per day generally indicates
diarrhea. This is mainly due to excess water, which
normally makes up 60–85% of fecal matter. In this
way, true diarrhea is distinguished from diseases that
cause only an increase in the number of bowel movements (hyperdefecation) or incontinence (involuntary
loss of bowel contents).
Diarrhea is also classified by physicians into
acute, which lasts one or two weeks, and chronic,
which continues for longer than 2 or 3 weeks. Viral
and bacterial infections are the most common causes
of acute diarrhea.
Description
In many cases, acute infectious diarrhea is a mild,
limited annoyance. However, worldwide acute infectious diarrhea has a huge impact, causing over five
million deaths per year. While most deaths are
among children under five years of age in developing
nations, the impact, even in developed countries, is
considerable. For example, over 250,000 individuals
are admitted to hospitals in the United States each
year because of one of these episodes. Rapid diagnosis
and proper treatment can prevent much of the suffering associated with these devastating illnesses.
Chronic diarrhea also has a considerable effect on
health, as well as on social and economic well being.
Patients with celiac disease, inflammatory bowel disease, and other prolonged diarrheal illnesses develop
nutritional deficiencies that diminish growth and
immunity. They affect social interaction and result in
the loss of many working hours.
Causes and symptoms
Diarrhea occurs because more fluid passes
through the large intestine (colon) than that organ
can absorb. As a rule, the colon can absorb several
times more fluid than is required on a daily basis.
However, when this reserve capacity is overwhelmed,
diarrhea occurs.
Diarrhea is caused by infections or illnesses that
either lead to excess production of fluids or prevent
absorption of fluids. Also, certain substances in the
colon, such as fats and bile acids, can interfere with
water absorption and cause diarrhea. In addition,
rapid passage of material through the colon can also
do the same.
Symptoms related to any diarrheal illness are
often those associated with any injury to the gastrointestinal tract, such as fever, nausea, vomiting, and
abdominal pain. All or none of these may be present
depending on the disease causing the diarrhea. The
number of bowel movements can vary—up to 20 or
more per day. In some patients, blood or pus is present
in the stool. Bowel movements may be difficult to
flush (float) or contain undigested food material.
The most common causes of acute diarrhea are
infections (the cause of traveler’s diarrhea), food
poisoning, and medications. Medications are a frequent and often over-looked cause, especially antibiotics and antacids. Less often, various sugar free foods,
which sometimes contain poorly absorbable materials,
cause diarrhea.
Chronic diarrhea is frequently due to many of the
same things that cause the shorter episodes (infections,
medications, etc.); symptoms just last longer. Some
infections can become chronic. This occurs mainly
with parasitic infections (such as Giardia) or when
patients have altered immunity (AIDS).
The following are the more usual causes of
chronic diarrhea:
 AIDS
 colon cancer and other bowel tumors
 endocrine or hormonal abnormalities (thyroid, diabetes mellitus, etc.)
 food allergy
 inflammatory bowel disease (Crohn’s disease and
ulcerative colitis)
 lactose intolerance
 malabsorption syndromes (celiac and Whipple’s
disease)
 other (alcohol, microscopic colitis, radiation,
surgery)
Complications
The major effects of diarrhea are dehydration,
malnutrition, and weight loss. Signs of dehydration
can be hard to notice, but increasing thirst, dry
mouth, weakness or lightheadedness (particularly if
worsening on standing), or a darkening/decrease in
urination are suggestive. Severe dehydration leads to
changes in the body’s chemistry and could become lifethreatening. Dehydration from diarrhea can result in
kidney failure, neurological symptoms, arthritis, and
skin problems.
Diagnosis
Most cases of acute diarrhea never need diagnosis
or treatment, as many are mild and produce few problems. But patients with fever over 102 8F (38.9 8C),
signs of dehydration, bloody bowel movements, severe
abdominal pain, known immune disease, or prior use
of antibiotics need prompt medical evaluation.
When diagnostic studies are needed, the most useful are stool culture and examination for parasites;
however these are often negative and a cause cannot
be found in a large number of patients. The earlier
cultures are performed, the greater the chance of
obtaining a positive result. For those with a history
of antibiotic use in the preceding two months, stool
samples need to be examined for the toxins that cause
antibiotic-associated colitis. Tests are also available to
check stool samples for microscopic amounts of blood
and for cells that indicate severe inflammation of the
colon. Examination with an endoscope is sometimes
helpful in determining severity and extent of inflammation. Tests to check changes in blood chemistry
(potassium, magnesium, etc.) and a complete blood
count (CBC) are also often performed.
Chronic diarrhea is quite different, and most
patients with this condition will receive some degree of
testing. Many exams are the same as for an acute
episode, as some infections and parasites cause both
types of diarrhea. A careful history to evaluate medication use, dietary changes, family history of illnesses, and
other symptoms is necessary. Key points in determining
the seriousness of symptoms are weight loss of over
10 lb (4.5 kg), blood in the stool, and nocturnal diarrhea
(symptoms that awaken the patient from sleep).
Both prescription and over-the-counter medications can contain additives, such as lactose and sorbitol, that will produce diarrhea in sensitive individuals.
Review of allergies or skin changes may also point to a
cause. Social history may indicate if stress is playing a
role or identify activities which can be associated with
diarrhea (for example, diarrhea that occurs in
runners).
A combination of stool, blood, and urine tests
may be needed in the evaluation of chronic diarrhea;
in addition a number of endoscopic and x-ray studies
are frequently required.
Treatment
Treatment is ideally directed toward correcting
the cause; however, the first aim should be to prevent
or treat dehydration and nutritional deficiencies. The
type of fluid and nutrient replacement will depend on
whether oral feedings can be taken and the severity of
fluid losses. Oral rehydration solution (ORS) or intravenous fluids are the choices; ORS is preferred if
possible.
A physician should be notified if the patient is
dehydrated, and if oral replacement is suggested then
commercial (Pedialyte and others) or homemade
preparations can be used. The World Health
Organization (WHO) has provided this easy recipe
for home preparation, which can be taken in small
frequent sips:
 Table salt—3/4 tsp
 Baking powder—1 tsp
 Orange juice—1 c
 Water—1 qt (1l)
When feasible, food intake should be continued
even in those with acute diarrhea. A physician should
be consulted as to what type and how much food is
permitted.
Anti-motility agents (loperamide, diphenoxylate)
are useful for those with chronic symptoms; their use is
limited or even contraindicated in most individuals
with acute diarrhea, especially in those with high
fever or bloody bowel movements. They should not
be taken without the advice of a physician.
Other treatments are available, depending on the
cause of symptoms. For example, the bulk agent psyllium helps some patients by absorbing excess fluid
and solidifying stools; cholestyramine, which binds
bile acids, is effective in treating bile salt induced
diarrhea. Low fat diets or more easily digestible fat is
useful in some patients. New antidiarrheal drugs that
decrease excessive secretion of fluid by the intestinal
tract is another approach for some diseases.
Avoidance of medications or other products that are
known to cause diarrhea (such as lactose) is curative in
some, but should be discussed with a physician.
Alternative treatment
It is especially important to find the cause of
diarrhea, since stopping diarrhea when it is the
body’s way of eliminating something foreign is not
helpful and can be harmful in the long run.
One effective alternative approach to preventing
and treating diarrhea involves oral supplementation of
aspects of the normal flora in the colon with the yeasts
Lactobacillus acidophilus, L. bifidus, or Saccharomyces
boulardii. In clinical settings, these ‘‘biotherapeutic’’
agents have repeatedly been helpful in the resolution
of diarrhea, especially antibiotic-associated diarrhea.
Their effectiveness is also supported by the results of a
research study published in the Journal of the
American Medical Association in 1996.
Nutrient replacement also plays a role in preventing and treating episodes of diarrhea. Zinc especially
appears to have an effect on the immune system, and
deficiency of this mineral can lead to chronic diarrhea.
Also, zinc replacement improves growth in young
patients. Plenty of fluids, especially water, should be
taken by individuals suffering from diarrhea to prevent dehydration. The BRAT diet also can be useful in
helping to resolve diarrhea. This diet limits food intake
to bananas, rice, applesauce, and toast. These foods
provide soluble and insoluble fiber without irritation.
If the toast is slightly burnt, the charcoal can help
sequester toxins and pull them from the body.
Acute homeopathic remedies can be very effective
for treating diarrhea especially in infants and young
children.
Prognosis
Prognosis is related to the cause of the diarrhea;
for most individuals in developed countries, a bout of
acute, infectious diarrhea is at best uncomfortable.
However, in both industrialized and developing
areas, serious complications and death can occur.
For those with chronic symptoms, an extensive
number of tests are usually necessary to make a proper
diagnosis and begin treatment; a specific diagnosis is
found in 90% of patients. In some, however, no specific cause is found and only treatment with bulk
agents or anti-motility agents is indicated.
Prevention
Proper hygiene and food handling techniques will
prevent many cases. Traveler’s diarrhea can be
avoided by use of Pepto-Bismol and/or antibiotics, if
necessary. The most important action is to prevent the
complications of dehydration.