Definition
Humans may alter their usual eating habits for
many reasons, including weight loss, disease prevention or treatment, removing toxins from the body, or
to achieve a general improvement in physical and
mental health. Others adopt special diets for religious
reasons. In the case of some vegetarians and vegans,
dietary changes are made out of ethical concerns for
the rights of animals.
Purpose
People who are moderately to severely overweight
can derive substantial health benefits from a weight-loss diet. A weight reduction of just 10–20
pounds can result in reduced cholesterol levels and
lower blood pressure. Weight-related health problems
include heart disease, diabetes, high blood pressure,
and high levels of blood sugar and cholesterol.
In individuals who are not overweight, dietary
changes also may be useful in the prevention or treatment of a range of ailments including acquired
immuno deficiency syndrome (AIDS), cancer, osteoporosis, inflammatory bowel disease, chronic pulmonary disease, renal disease, Parkinson’s disease, seizure
disorders, and food allergies and intolerances.
Description
Origins
The practice of altering diet for special reasons has
existed since antiquity. For example, Judaism has
included numerous dietary restrictions for thousands
of years. One ancient Jewish sect, the Essenes, is said
to have developed a primitive detoxification diet aimed
at preparing the bodies, minds, and spirits of its members for the coming of a ‘‘messiah’’ who would deliver
them from their Roman captors. Preventive and therapeutic diets became popular during the late twentieth
century. Books promoting the latest dietary plan continue to make the bestseller lists, although not all of
the information given is considered authoritative.
The idea of a healthful diet is to provide all of the
calories and nutrients needed by the body for optimal
performance, at the same time ensuring that neither
nutritional deficiencies nor excesses occur. Diet plans
that claim to accomplish those objectives are so
numerous they are virtually uncountable. These diets
employ a variety of approaches, including the
following:
 Fixed-menu: Offers little choice to the dieter.
Specifies exactly which foods will be consumed.
Easy to follow, but may be considered boring to
some dieters.
 Formula: Replaces some or all meals with a nutritionally balanced liquid formula or powder.
 Exchange-type: Allows the dieter to choose between
selected foods from each food group.
 Flexible: Doesn’t concern itself with the overall diet,
simply with one aspect such as fat or energy.
Diets also may be classified according to the types
of foods they allow. For example, an omnivorous diet
consists of both animal and plant foods, whereas a
lacto-ovo-vegetarian diet permits no animal flesh,
but includes eggs, milk, and dairy products. A vegan
diet is a stricter form of vegetarianism in which eggs,
cheese, and other milk products are prohibited.
A third way of classifying diets is according to
their purpose: religious, weight-loss, detoxification,
lifestyle-related, or aimed at prevention or treatment
of a specific disease.
Precautions
Dieters should be cautious about plans that
severely restrict the size of food portions, or that eliminate entire food groups from the diet. It is highly
probable that they will become discouraged and drop
out of such programs. The best diet is one that can be
maintained indefinitely without ill effects, that offers
sufficient variety and balance to provide everything
needed for good health, and that is considerate of
personal food preferences. Many controversies have
arisen in the past over the benefits and risks of highprotein, low carbohydrate diets such as the Atkins diet.
Most physician groups and health organizations have
spoken out negatively against the program. In 2003,
these statements were largely supported. Though clinical trials showed that these types of diets worked in
lowering weight without raising cholesterol for the
short-term, many of the participants gained a percentage of the weight back after only one year. A physician group also spoke out about high protein
diets’ dangers for people with decreased kidney function and the risk of bone loss due to decreased calcium
intake.
Low-fat diets are not recommended for children
under the age of two. Young children need extra fat to
maintain their active, growing bodies. Fat intake may be
gradually reduced between the ages of two and five, after
which it should be limited to a maximum of 30% of total
calories through adulthood. Saturated fat should be
restricted to no more than 10% of total calories.
Weight-loss dieters should be wary of the ‘‘yo-yo’’
effect that occurs when numerous attempts are made
to reduce weight using high-risk, quick-fix diets. This
continued ‘‘cycling’’ between weight loss and weight
gain can slow the basal metabolic rate and can sometimes lead to eating disorders. The dieter may become
discouraged and frustrated by this success/failure
cycle. The end result of yo-yo dieting is that it becomes
more difficult to maintain a healthy weight.
Caution also should be exercised about weight
loss diets that require continued purchases of special
prepackaged foods. Not only do these tend to be costly
and over-processed, they also may prevent dieters
from learning the food-selection and preparation skills
essential to maintenance of weight loss. Further, dieters
should consider whether they want to carry these special foods to work, restaurants, or homes of friends.
Concern has been expressed about weight-loss
diet plans that do not include exercise, considered
essential to long-term weight management. Some
diets and supplements may be inadvisable for patients
with special conditions or situations. In fact, use of the
weight loss supplement ephedra was found to cause
serious conditions such as heart attack and stroke. In
2003, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
was considering controlling or banning the supplement. In short, most physician organizations see fad
diets as distracting from learning how to achieve
weight control over the long term through healthy
lifestyle changes such as eating smaller, more balanced
meals and exercising regularly.
Certain fad diets purporting to be official diets of
groups such as the American Heart Association and the
Mayo Clinic are in no way endorsed by those institutions. People thinking of starting such a diet should
check with the institution to ensure its name has not
been misappropriated by an unscrupulous practitioner.
Side effects
A wide range of side effects (some quite serious)
can result from special diets, especially those that are nutritionally unbalanced. Further problems can arise
if the dieter is taking high doses of dietary supplements. Food is essential to life, and improper nutrition
can result in serious illness or death.
Research and general acceptance
It is agreed among traditional and complementary
practitioners that many patients could substantially
benefit from improved eating habits. Specialized
diets have proved effective against a wide variety of
conditions and diseases. However, dozens of
unproved but widely publicized fad diets emerge each
year, prompting widespread concerns about their usefulness, cost to the consumer, and their safety.