Definition
Diffuse esophageal spasm is a term used to define
an uncoordinated or spastic esophagus.
Description
The esophagus is a muscular tube that actively
transports food from the throat to the stomach by
rhythmic contractions known as peristalsis. The actual
mechanism and anatomy are quite complex, involving
three distinct segments and allowing a person to swallow even when upside-down. Diffuse esophageal
spasm describes a condition where the entire esophagus is spastic—along its entire length, the muscular
activity is increased and uncoordinated. The name
corkscrew esophagus describes perfectly the appearance of this disorder on x rays.
X rays may reveal a slightly different appearance
and result in the designation rosary bead esophagus,
but the cause is still diffuse spasm, and the two entities
behave in the same way.
Causes and symptoms
The cause appears to be disruption of the complex
system of nerves that coordinates the muscular activity. The result is difficulty swallowing (dysphagia) and
pain that feels like a heart attack and can involve the
entire chest, jaw, and arms.
Diagnosis
Swallowing problems usually call for esophagograms. In the x-ray department, the patient is given a
contrast agent to drink. During swallowing, x rays
record the passage of the agent down the esophagus
and into the stomach. Instead of a straight tube with
well-coordinated waves of contraction, the resulting x
rays show a writhing organ resembling a giant
corkscrew.
Another test that is used in many disorders of
esophageal motility is manometry. Pressures inside
the esophagus are measured every inch or so using a
balloon device that is passed all the way down to the
stomach. The result is a precise record of its activity
that yields a specific diagnosis.
Treatment
Soft and liquid foods pass more easily than solid
pieces. Medications of several types are helpful—
nifedipine, hydralazine, isoproterenol, and nitrates
being the most successful. Several other treatments have uncertain results. For severe cases, relief is
obtained two-thirds of the time by cutting the muscles
along the entire length of the esophagus. This is a
major surgical procedure.
Prognosis
This condition does not go away, nor is treatment
entirely satisfactory. Patients need to be careful of
what they eat and continue on medication if a beneficial one is found. Fortunately, the condition does not
get progressively worse as time passes.