Definition
Digitalis drugs are medicines made from a type of
foxglove plant (Digitalis purpurea) that have a stimulating effect on the heart.
Purpose
Digitalis drugs are used to treat heart problems
such as congestive heart failure and irregular heartbeat.
These medicines help make the heart stronger and more
efficient. This, in turn, improves blood circulation and
helps relieve the swelling of the hands and ankles that is
common in people with heart problems.
Description
Digitalis drugs, also known as digitalis glycosides,
are available only with a physician’s prescription.
They are sold in tablet, capsule, liquid, and injectable
forms. Commonly used digitalis drugs are digitoxin
(Crystodigin) and digoxin (Lanoxin).
Recommended dosage
The recommended dosage is different for each
patient. The physician who prescribes the medicine
will determine the correct dose. Taking exactly the
right amount of medicine and taking it exactly as
directed are very important. Never take larger or
more frequent doses. During treatment with a digitalis
heart medicine, the physician will monitor blood levels
of the drug and will decide whether the dose needs to
be changed. Patients should never change the dose of
this medicine unless told to do so by their physicians.
Precautions
Seeing a physician regularly while taking digitalis
drugs is very important. The physician will check to
make sure the medicine is working as it should and will
make any necessary changes in dosage or in instructions for taking the medicine.
Patients taking digitalis drugs should learn to take
their pulse and should check it regularly while under
treatment with this medicine. Changes in pulse rate,
rhythm, or force could be signs of side effects.
Do not stop taking this medicine suddenly without checking with the physician who prescribed it.
This could cause a serious change in heart function.
Digitalis drugs are responsible for many accidental poisonings in children. Keep this medicine out of
the reach of children.
Be alert to the signs of overdose. Overdosing is a
serious concern with digitalis drugs, because the
amount of medicine that most people need to help
their heart problems is very close to the amount that
can cause problems from overdose. If any of these
signs of overdose occur, check with a physician as
soon as possible:
 loss of appetite
 nausea
 vomiting
 pain in the lower stomach
 diarrhea
 extreme tiredness or weakness
 extremely slow or irregular heartbeat (or fast heartbeat in children)
 blurred vision or other vision changes
 drowsiness
 confusion or depression
 headache
 fainting
Anyone who is taking digitalis drugs should be
sure to tell the health care professional in charge
before having any surgical or dental procedures or
receiving emergency treatment. Physicians may advise
people taking digitalis drugs to wear or carry medical
identification indicating that they are taking this
medicine.
Patients need to be very careful not to accidentally take this medicine in place of another medicine
that looks similar. Patients who are taking other
medicines that look like their digitalis medicine
should ask their pharmacists for suggestions on how
to avoid mix-ups.
Anyone who has had unusual reactions to digitalis
drugs in the past should let his or her physician know
before taking the drugs again. The physician should
also be told about any allergies to foods, dyes, preservatives, or other substances.
Women who are pregnant or breastfeeding or who
may become pregnant should check with their physicians before using digitalis drugs.
Older people may be especially sensitive to the
effects of digitalis drugs, which may increase the
chance of overdose.
Before using digitalis drugs, people with any of the
following the medical problems should make sure
their physicians are aware of their conditions:
 heart disease
 heart rhythm problems
 severe lung disease
 kidney disease
 liver disease
 thyroid disease
Side effects
Side effects are rare with this medicine. Check
with a physician as soon as possible if a skin rash,
hives, or any other unusual or troublesome symptoms
occur. Watch for signs of overdose.
Interactions
Digitalis drugs may interact with a number of
other medicines. When this happens, the effects of
one or both of the drugs may change or the risk
of side effects may be greater. For example:
 Taking digitalis drugs with other heart medicines,
amphetamines, or diet pills could increase the risk
of heart rhythm problems.
 Calcium channel blockers, used to treat high blood
pressure, may cause higher than usual levels of digitalis drugs in the body that could lead to symptoms
of overdose as covered in the above section.
Diuretics (water pills) or other medicines that lower
the amount of potassium in the body may increase
the side effects of digitalis drugs.
 Medicines that increase the amount of potassium in
the body may raise the risk of serious heart rhythm
problems when taken with digitalis drugs.
 Diarrhea medicine or cholesterol-lowering drugs
such as cholestyramine (Questran) and colestipol
(Colestid) may keep digitalis medicines from being
absorbed into the body. To prevent this problem,
digitalis drugs should be taken several hours before
or after taking these medicines.
The list above does not include every drug that
may interact with digitalis drugs. Be sure to check with
a physician or pharmacist before taking any other
prescription or nonprescription (over-the-counter)
medicine.
In addition, a diet high in fiber may interfere with
the effects of digitalis drugs by preventing the medicine
from being absorbed into the body. To avoid this
problem, eat high fiber foods (such as bran products,
whole wheat bread, and fresh fruits and vegetables)
several hours before or after taking digitalis medicine.