Definition
Discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE) is a disease
in which coin-shaped (discoid) red bumps appear on
the skin.
Description
The disease called discoid lupus erythematosus
only affects the skin, although similar discoid skin
lesions can occur in the serious disease called systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE). Only about 10% of all
patients with DLE will go on to develop the multiorgan disease SLE.
The tendency to develop DLE seems to run in
families. Although men or women of any age can
develop DLE, it occurs in women three times more
frequently than in men. The typical DLE patient is a
woman in her 30s.
Causes and symptoms
The cause of DLE is unknown. It is thought that
DLE (like SLE) may be an autoimmune disorder.
Autoimmune disorders are those that occur when cells
of the immune system are misdirected against the
body. Normally, immune cells work to recognize and
help destroy foreign invaders like bacteria, viruses,
and fungi. In autoimmune disorders, these cells mistakenly recognize various tissues of the body as foreign invaders, and attack and destroy these tissues. In
SLE, the misdirected immune cells are antibodies. In
DLE, the damaging cells are believed to be a type of
white blood cell called a T lymphocyte. The injury to
the skin results in inflammation and the characteristic
discoid lesions.
In DLE, the characteristic skin lesion is circular
and raised. The reddish rash is about 5–10 mm in
diameter, with the center often somewhat scaly and
lighter in color than the darker outer ring. The surface
of these lesions is sometimes described as ‘‘warty.’’
There is rarely any itching or pain associated with
discoid lesions. They tend to appear on the face, ears,
neck, scalp, chest, back, and arms. As DLE lesions
heal, they leave thickened, scarred areas of skin. When
the scalp is severely affected, there may be associated
hair loss (alopecia).
People with DLE tend to be quite sensitive to the
sun. They are more likely to get a sunburn, and the sun
is likely to worsen their discoid lesions.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of DLE usually requires a skin biopsy.
A small sample of a discoid lesion is removed, specially
prepared, and examined under a microscope. Usually,
the lesion has certain microscopic characteristics that
allow it to be identified as a DLE lesion. Blood tests
will not reveal the type of antibodies present in SLE,
and physical examination usually does not reveal anything other than the skin lesions. If antibodies exist in
the blood, or if other symptoms or physical signs are
found, it is possible that the discoid lesions are a sign
of SLE rather than DLE.
Treatment
Treatment of DLE primarily involves the use of a
variety of skin creams. Sunscreens are used for
protection. Steroid creams can be applied to decrease
inflammation. Occasionally, small amounts of a steroid preparation will be injected with a needle into a
specific lesion. Because of their long list of side effects,
steroid preparations taken by mouth are avoided.
Sometimes, short-term treatment with oral steroids
will be used for particularly severe DLE outbreaks.
Medications used to treat the infectious disease
malaria are often used to treat DLE.
Alternative treatment
Alternative treatments for DLE include eating a
healthy diet, low in red meat and dairy products and
high in fish containing omega-3 fatty acids. These
types of fish include mackerel, sardines, and salmon.
Following a healthy diet is thought to decrease
inflammation. Dietary supplements believed to be
helpful include vitamins B, C, E, and selenium.
Vitamin A is also recommended to improve DLE
lesions. Constitutional homeopathic treatment can
help heal DLE as well as help prevent it developing
into SLE.
Prognosis
For the most part, the prognosis for people with
DLE is excellent. While the lesions may be cosmetically unsightly, they are not life threatening and
usually do not cause a patient to change his or her
lifestyle. Only about 10% of patients with DLE will go
on to develop SLE.
Prevention
DLE cannot be prevented. Recommendations to
prevent flares of DLE in patients with the disease
include avoiding exposure to sun and consistently
using sunscreen.