Definition
Diuretics are medicines that help reduce the
amount of water in the body.
Purpose
Diuretics are used to treat the buildup of excess
fluid in the body that occurs with some medical conditions such as congestive heart failure, liver disease,
and kidney disease. Some diuretics are also prescribed
to treat high blood pressure. These drugs act on the
kidneys to increase urine output. This reduces the
amount of fluid in the bloodstream, which in turn
lowers blood pressure.
Description
There are several types of diuretics, also called
water pills:
 Loop diuretics, such as bumetanide (Bumex) and
furosemide (Lasix), get their name from the loopshaped part of the kidneys where they have their
effect.
 Thiazide diuretics include such commonly used
diuretics as hydrochlorothiazide (HydroDIURIL,
Esidrix), chlorothiazide (Diuril), and chlorthalidone
(Hygroton).
 Potassium-sparing diuretics prevent the loss of
potassium, which is a problem with other types
of diuretics. Examples of potassium-sparing diuretics are amiloride (Midamor) and triamterene
(Dyrenium).
In addition, some medicines contain combinations of two diuretics. The brands Dyazide and
Maxzide, for example, contain the thiazide diuretic
hydrochlorothiazide with the potassium-sparing
diuretic triamterene.
Some nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines contain diuretics. However, the medicines
described here cannot be bought without a physician’s
prescription. They are available in tablet, capsule,
liquid, and injectable forms.
Recommended dosage
The recommended dosage depends on the type of
diuretic and may be different for different patients.
Check with the physician who prescribed the drug or
the pharmacist who filled the prescription for the correct dosage, and take the medicine exactly as directed.
Precautions
Seeing a physician regularly while taking a diuretic is important. The physician will check to make sure
the medicine is working as it should and will watch for
unwanted side effects.
Some people feel unusually tired when they first
start taking diuretics. This effect usually becomes less
noticeable over time, as the body adjusts to the
medicine.
Because diuretics increase urine output, people
who take this medicine may need to urinate more
often, even during the night. Health care professionals
can help patients schedule their doses to avoid interfering with their sleep or regular activities.
For patients taking the kinds of diuretics that rob
potassium from the body, physicians may recommend
adding potassium-rich foods or drinks, such as citrus
fruits and juices, to the diet. Or they may suggest
taking a potassium supplement or taking another
medicine that keeps the body from losing too much
potassium. If the physician recommends any of these
measures, be sure to closely follow his or her directions. Do not make other diet changes without checking with the physician. People who are taking
potassium-sparing diuretics should not add potassium
to their diets, as too much potassium may be harmful.
People who take diuretics may lose too much
water or potassium when they get sick, especially if
they have severe vomiting and diarrhea. They should
check with their physicians if they become ill.
These medicines make some people feel lightheaded, dizzy, or faint when they get up after sitting or lying down. Older people are especially likely to
have this problem. Drinking alcohol, exercising,
standing for long periods, or being in hot weather
may make the problem worse. To lessen the problem,
get up gradually and hold onto something for support
if possible. Avoid drinking too much alcohol and be
careful in hot weather or when exercising or standing
for a long time.
Anyone who is taking a diuretic should be sure to
tell the health care professional in charge before having surgical or dental procedures, medical tests, or
emergency treatment.
Some diuretics make the skin more sensitive to
sunlight. Even brief exposure to sun can cause a severe
sunburn, itching, a rash, redness, or other changes in
skin color. While being treated with this medicine,
avoid being in direct sunlight, especially between
10 a.m. and 3 p.m.; wear a hat and tightly woven
clothing that covers the arms and legs; use a sunscreen
with a skin protection factor (SPF) of at least 15;
protect the lips with a sun block lipstick; and do not
use tanning beds, tanning booths, or sunlamps. People
with fair skin may need to use a sunscreen with a
higher skin protection factor.
Special conditions
People who have certain medical conditions or
who are taking certain other medicines may have problems if they take diuretics. Before taking these drugs,
be sure to let the physician know about any of these
conditions:
ALLERGIES. Anyone who has had unusual reactions to diuretics or sulfonamides (sulfa drugs) in the
past should let his or her physician know before using
a diuretic. The physician should also be told about any
allergies to foods, dyes, preservatives, or other
substances.
PREGNANCY. Diuretics will not help the swelling
of hands and feet that some women have during pregnancy. In general, pregnant women should not use
diuretics unless a physician recommends their use.
Although studies have not been done on pregnant
women, studies of laboratory animals show that
some diuretics can cause harmful effects when taken
during pregnancy.
 BREASTFEEDING. Some diuretics pass into breast
milk, but no reports exist of problems in nursing
babies whose mothers use this medicine. However,
thiazide diuretics may decrease the flow of breast
milk. Women who are breastfeeding and need to use
a diuretic should check with their physicians.
OTHER MEDICAL CONDITIONS. Side effects of
some diuretics may be more likely in people who
have had a recent heart attack or who have liver disease or severe kidney disease. Other diuretics may not
work properly in people with liver disease or severe
kidney disease. Diuretics may worsen certain medical
conditions, such as gout, kidney stones, pancreatitis,
lupus erythematosus, and hearing problems. In addition, people with diabetes should be aware that diuretics may increase blood sugar levels. People with heart
or blood vessel disease should know that some diuretics increase cholesterol or triglyceride levels. The risk
of an allergic reaction to certain diuretics is greater in
people with bronchial asthma. Before using diuretics,
people with any of these medical problems should
make sure their physicians are aware of their conditions. Also, people who have trouble urinating or who
have high potassium levels in their blood may not be
able to take diuretics and should check with a physician before using them.
USE OF CERTAIN MEDICINES. Taking diuretics with
certain other drugs may affect the way the drugs work
or may increase the chance of side effects.
Side effects
Some side effects, such as loss of appetite, nausea
and vomiting, stomach cramps, diarrhea, and dizziness, usually lessen or go away as the body adjusts to
the medicine. These problems do not need medical
attention unless they continue or interfere with normal
activities.
Patients taking potassium-sparing diuretics
should know the signs of too much potassium and
should check with a physician as soon as possible if
any of these symptoms occur:
 irregular heartbeat
 breathing problems
 numbness or tingling in the hands, feet, or lips
 confusion or nervousness
 unusual tiredness or weakness
 weak or heavy feeling in the legs
Patients taking diuretics that cause potassium loss
should know the signs of too little potassium and
should check with a physician as soon as possible if
they have any of these symptoms:
 fast or irregular heartbeat
 weak pulse
 nausea or vomiting
 dry mouth
  excessive thirst
 muscle cramps or pain
 unusual tiredness or weakness
 mental or mood changes
Interactions
Diuretics may interact with other medicines.
When this happens, the effects of one or both of the
drugs may change or the risk of side effects may be
greater. Anyone who takes a diuretic should let the
physician know all other medicines he or she is taking
and should ask whether the possible interactions can
interfere with drug therapy. Among the drugs that
may interact with diuretics are:
 Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors,
such as benazepril (Lotensin), captopril (Capoten),
and enalapril (Vasotec), used to treat high blood pressure. Taking these drugs with potassium-sparing
diuretics may cause levels of potassium in the blood
to be too high, increasing the chance of side effects.
 Cholesterol-lowering drugs such as cholestyramine
(Questran) and colestipol (Colestid). Taking these
drugs with combination diuretics such as Dyazide
and Maxzide may keep the diuretic from working.
Take the diuretic at least one hour before or four
hours after the cholesterol-lowering drug.
 Cyclosporine (Sandimmune), a medicine that suppresses the immune system. Taking this medicine
with potassium-sparing diuretics may increase the
chance of side effects by causing levels of potassium
in the blood to be too high.
 Potassium supplements, other medicines containing
potassium, or salt substitutes that contain potassium. Taking these with potassium-sparing diuretics
may lead to too much potassium in the blood,
increasing the chance of side effects.
 Lithium, used to treat bipolar disorder (manicdepressive illness). Using this medicine with potassium-sparing diuretics may allow lithium to build up
to poisonous levels in the body.
 Digitalis heart drugs, such as digoxin (Lanoxin).
Using this medicine with combination diuretics
such as triamterene-hydrocholorthiazide (Dyazide,
Maxzide) may cause blood levels of the heart medicine to be too high, making side effects such as
changes in heartbeat more likely.
The list above does not include every drug that
may interact with diuretics. Check with a physician or
pharmacist before combining diuretics with any other
prescription or nonprescription (over-the-counter)
medicine.