Definition
As a disorder, dizziness is classified into three
categories–vertigo, syncope, and nonsyncope nonvertigo. Each category has a characteristic set of symptoms, all related to the sense of balance. In general,
syncope is defined by a brief loss of consciousness
(fainting) or by dimmed vision and feeling uncoordinated, confused, and lightheaded. Many people
experience a sensation like syncope when they stand
up too fast. Vertigo is the feeling that either the individual or the surroundings are spinning. This sensation is like being on a spinning amusement park ride.
Individuals with nonsyncope nonvertigo dizziness feel
as though they cannot keep their balance. This feeling
may become worse with movement.
Description
The brain coordinates information from the eyes,
the inner ear, and the body’s senses to maintain balance. If any of these information sources is disrupted,
the brain may not be able to compensate. For example, people sometimes experience motion sickness
because the information from their body tells the
brain that they are sitting still, but information from
the eyes indicates that they are moving. The messages
do not correspond and dizziness results.
Vision and the body’s senses are the most important systems for maintaining balance, but problems in
the inner ear are the most frequent cause of dizziness.
The inner ear, also called the vestibular system, contains fluid that helps fine tune the information the
brain receives from the eyes and the body. When
fluid volume or pressure in one inner ear changes,
information about balance is altered. The discrepancy
gives conflicting messages to the brain about balance
and induces dizziness.
Certain medical conditions can cause dizziness,
because they affect the systems that maintain balance.
For example, the inner ear is very sensitive to changes
in blood flow. Because medical conditions such as high
blood pressure or low blood sugar can affect blood
flow, these conditions are frequently accompanied by
dizziness. Circulation disorders are the most common
causes of dizziness. Other causes are head injury, ear
infection, allergies, and nervous system disorders.
Dizziness often disappears without treatment or
with treatment of the underlying problem, but it can
be long term or chronic. According to the National
Institutes of Health, 42% of Americans will seek medical help for dizziness at some point in their lives. The
costs may exceed a billion dollars and account for five
million doctor visits annually. Episodes of dizziness
increase with age. Among people aged 75 or older,
dizziness is the most frequent reason for seeing a
doctor.
Causes and symptoms
Careful attention to symptoms can help determine
the underlying cause of the dizziness. Underlying problems may be benign and easily treated or they may be
dangerous and in need of intensive therapy. Not all
cases of dizziness can be linked to a specific cause.
More than one type of dizziness can be experienced
at the same time and symptoms may be mixed.
Episodes of dizziness may last for a few seconds or
for days. The length of an episode is related to the
underlying cause.
The symptoms of syncope include dimmed vision,
loss of coordination, confusion, lightheadedness, and
sweating. These symptoms can lead to a brief loss of
consciousness or fainting. They are related to a
reduced flow of blood to the brain; they often occur
when a person is standing up and can be relieved by
sitting or lying down. Vertigo is characterized by a
sensation of spinning or turning, accompanied by nausea, vomiting, ringing in the ears, headache, or fatigue. An individual may have trouble walking, remaining coordinated, or keeping balance. Nonsyncope
nonvertigo dizziness is characterized by a feeling of
being off balance that becomes worse if the individual
tries moving or performing detail-intense tasks.
A person may experience dizziness for many reasons. Syncope is associated with low blood pressure,
heart problems, and disorders in the autonomic nervous system, the system of involuntary functions
such as breathing. Syncope may also arise from emotional distress, pain, and other reactions to outside
stressors. Nonsyncope nonvertigo dizziness may be
caused by rapid breathing, low blood sugar, or
migraine headache, as well as by more serious medical
conditions.
Vertigo is often associated with inner ear problems called vestibular disorders. A particularly
intense vestibular disorder, Meni ´ ere’s disease, inter- ´
feres with the volume of fluid in the inner ear. This
disease, which affects approximately one in every
1,000 people, causes intermittent vertigo over the
course of weeks, months, or years. Meni ´ ere’s disease ´
is often accompanied by ringing or buzzing in the ear,
hearing loss, and a feeling that the ear is blocked.
Damage to the nerve that leads from the ear to the
brain can also cause vertigo. Such damage can result
from head injury or a tumor. An acoustic neuroma, for
example, is a benign tumor that wraps around the
nerve. Vertigo can also be caused by disorders of the
central nervous system and the cirulatory system, such
as hardening of the arteries (arteriosclerosis), stroke,
or multiple sclerosis.
Some medications cause changes in blood pressure or blood flow. These medications can cause dizziness in some people. Prescription medications carry
warnings of such side effects, but common drugs, such
as caffeine or nicotine, can also cause dizziness.
Certain antibiotics can damage the inner ear and
cause hearing loss and dizziness.
Diet may cause dizziness. The role of diet may be
direct, as through alcohol intake. It may be also be
indirect, as through arteriosclerosis caused by a highfat diet. Some people experience a slight dip in blood
sugar and mild dizziness if they miss a meal, but this
condition is rarely dangerous unless the person is
diabetic. Food sensitivities or allergies can also be a
cause of dizziness. Chronic conditions, such as heart
disease, and serious acute problems, such as seizures
and strokes, can cause dizziness. However, such
conditions usually exhibit other characteristic
symptoms.
Diagnosis
During the initial medical examination, an individual with dizziness should provide a detailed description of the type of dizziness experienced, when it
occurs, and how often each episode lasts. A diary of
symptoms may help track this information. Report
any symptoms that accompany the dizziness, such as
a ringing in the ear or nausea, any recent injury or
infection, and any medication taken.
Blood pressure, pulse, respiration, and body temperature are checked, and the ear, nose, and throat are
scrutinized. The sense of balance is assessed by moving
the individual’s head to various positions or by tilttable testing. In tilt-table testing, the person lies on a
table that can be shifted into different positions and
reports any dizziness that occurs.
Further tests may be indicated by the initial examination. Hearing tests help assess ear damage. X rays,
computed tomography scan (CT scan), and magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) can pinpoint evidence of
nerve damage, tumor, or other structural problems.
If a vestibular disorder is suspected, a technique called
electronystagmography (ENG) may be used. ENG
measures the electrical impulses generated by eye
movements. Blood tests can determine diabetes, high
cholesterol, and other diseases. In some cases, a heart
evaluation may be useful. Despite thorough testing, an
underlying cause cannot always be determined.
Treatment
Treatment is determined by the underlying cause.
If an individual has a cold or influenza, a few days of
bed rest is usually adequate to resolve dizziness. Other
causes of dizziness, such as mild vestibular system
damage, may resolve without medical treatment.
If dizziness continues, drug therapy may prove
helpful. Because circulatory problems often cause dizziness, medication may be prescribed to control blood
pressure or to treat arteriosclerosis. Sedatives may be
useful to relieve the tension that can trigger or aggravate dizziness. Low blood sugar associated with diabetes sometimes causes dizziness and is treated by
controlling blood sugar levels. An individual may be
asked to avoid caffeine, nicotine, alcohol, and any
substances that cause allergic reactions. A low-salt
diet may also help some people.
When other measures have failed, surgery may be
suggested to relieve pressure on the inner ear. If the
dizziness is not treatable by drugs, surgery, or other
means, physical therapy may be used and the patient
may be taught coping mechanisms for the problem.Alternative treatment
Because dizziness may arise from serious conditions,
it is advisable to seek medical treatment. Alternative
treatments canoftenbeused alongside conventionalmedicine without conflict. Relaxation techniques, such as
yoga and massage therapy that focus on relieving tension,
are popularly recommended methods for reducing stress.
Aromatherapists recommend a warm bath scented with
essential oils of lavender, geranium, and sandalwood.
Homeopathic therapies can work very effectively
for dizziness, and are especially applicable when no
organic cause can be identified. An osteopath or chiropractor may suggest adjustments of the head, jaw,
neck, and lower back to relieve pressure on the inner
ear. Acupuncturists also offer some treatment options
for acute and chronic cases of dizziness. Nutritionists
may be able to offer advice and guidance in choosing
dietary supplements, identifying foods to avoid, and
balancing nutritional needs.
Prognosis
Outcome depends on the cause of dizziness.
Controlling or curing the underlying factors usually
relieves dizziness. In some cases, dizziness disappears
without treatment. In a few cases, dizziness can
become a permanent disabling condition and a person’s options are limited.
Prevention
Most people learn through experience that certain
activities will make them dizzy and they learn to avoid
them. For example, if reading in a car produces motion
sickness, an individual leaves reading materials for
after the trip. Changes to the diet can also cut down
on episodes of dizziness in susceptible people.
Relaxation techniques can help ward off tension and
anxiety that can cause dizziness.
These techniques can help minimize or even prevent dizziness for people with chronic diseases. For
example, persons with Meni ´ ere’s disease may avoid ´
episodes of vertigo by leaving salt, alcohol, and caffeine
out of their diets. Reducing blood cholesterol can help
diminish arteriosclerosis and indirectly treat dizziness.
Some cases of dizziness cannot be prevented.
Acoustic neuromas, for example, are not predictable
or preventable. When the underlying cause of dizziness
cannot be discovered, it may be difficult to recommend
preventive measures. Alternative approaches designed
to rebalance the body’s energy flow, such as acupuncture and constitutional homeopathy, may be helpful in
cases where the cause of dizziness cannot be pinpointed.