Definition
Down syndrome (DS) is the most common cause
of mental retardation and malformation in a newborn.
It occurs because of the presence of an extra chromosome. It was first described in 1866 by Dr. John L. H.
Down (1828–1896), an English physician.
Down syndrome occurs about once in every 800
births. It is estimated that about 6,000 children are
born with DS each year in the United States.
Description
Chromosomes are the units of genetic information that exist within every cell of the body. Twentythree distinctive pairs, or 46 total chromosomes, are
located within the nucleus (central structure) of each
cell. When a baby is conceived by the combining of
one sperm cell with one egg cell, the baby receives
23 chromosomes from each parent, for a total of
46 chromosomes. Sometimes, an accident in the production of a sperm or egg cell causes that cell to
contain 24 chromosomes. This event is referred to as
nondisjunction. When this defective cell is involved in
the conception of a baby, that baby will have a total of
47 chromosomes. The extra chromosome in Down
syndrome is labeled number 21. For this reason, the
existence of three such chromosomes is sometimes
referred to as trisomy 21.
In a very rare number of Down syndrome cases
(about 1–2%), the original egg and sperm cells are
completely normal. The problem occurs sometime
shortly after fertilization; during the phase where
cells are dividing rapidly. One cell divides abnormally,
creating a line of cells with an extra chromosome 21.
This form of genetic disorder is called a mosaic. The
individual with this type of Down syndrome has two
types of cells: those with 46 chromosomes (the normal
number), and those with 47 chromosomes (as occurs
in Down syndrome). Some researchers have suggested
that individuals with this type of mosaic form of Down
syndrome have less severe signs and symptoms of the
disorder.
Another relatively rare genetic accident which can
cause Down syndrome is called translocation. During
cell division, the number 21 chromosome somehow
breaks. A piece of the 21 chromosome then becomes
attached to another chromosome. Each cell still has
46 chromosomes, but the extra piece of chromosome
21 results in the signs and symptoms of Down syndrome. Translocations occur in about 3–4% of cases
of Down syndrome.
Down syndrome occurs in about one in every
800–1,000 births. It affects an equal number of boys
and girls. Less than 25% of Down syndrome cases
occur due to an extra chromosome in the sperm cell.
The majority of cases of Down syndrome occur due to
an extra chromosome 21 within the egg cell supplied
by the mother (nondisjunction). As a woman’s age
(maternal age) increases, the risk of having a Down
syndrome baby increases significantly. For example,
at younger ages, the risk is about one in 4,000. By the
time the woman is age 35, the risk increases to one in
400; by age 40 the risk increases to one in 110; and by
age 45 the risk becomes one in 35. There is no
increased risk of either mosaicism or translocation
with increased maternal age.
Down syndrome sometimes occurs together with
such other developmental disorders as Rett syndrome.
Although such double diagnoses are very rare, it is
important for parents to recognize that the presence
of one chromosomal abnormality does not exclude
the possibility that their child may have a second
anomaly.
Causes and symptoms
While Down syndrome is a chromosomal disorder,
a baby is usually identified at birth through observation
of a set of common physical characteristics. Babies with
Down syndrome tend to be overly quiet, less responsive, with weak, floppy muscles. Furthermore, a number of physical signs may be present. These include:
 flat appearing face
 small head
 flat bridge of the nose
 smaller than normal, low-set nose
 small mouth, which causes the tongue to stick out
and to appear overly large
 upward slanting eyes
 extra folds of skin located at the inside corner of each
eye, near the nose (called epicanthal folds)
 rounded cheeks
 small, misshapen ears
 small, wide hands
 an unusual, deep crease across the center of the palm
(called a simian crease)
 a malformed fifth finger
 a wide space between the big and the second toes
 unusual creases on the soles of the feet
 overly-flexible joints (sometimes referred to as being
double-jointed)
 shorter than normal height
Other types of defects often accompany Down
syndrome. About 30–50% of all children with Down
syndrome are found to have heart defects. A number
of different heart defects are common in Down
syndrome, including abnormal openings (holes) in
the walls that separate the heart’s chambers (atrial
septal defect, ventricular septal defect). These result
in abnormal patterns of blood flow within the heart.
The abnormal blood flow often means that less oxygen
is sent into circulation throughout the body. Another
heart defect that occurs in Down syndrome is called
Tetralogy of Fallot. Tetralogy of Fallot consists of
a hole in the heart, along with three other major
heart defects.
Malformations of the gastrointestinal tract are
present in about 5–7% of children with Down syndrome. The most common malformation is a narrowed, obstructed duodenum (the part of the
intestine into which the stomach empties). This disorder, called duodenal atresia, interferes with the baby’s
milk or formula leaving the stomach and entering the
intestine for digestion. The baby often vomits forcibly
after feeding, and cannot gain weight appropriately
until the defect is repaired.
Other medical conditions that occur in patients
with Down syndrome include an increased chance of
developing infections, especially ear infections and
pneumonia; certain kidney disorders; thyroid disease
(especially low or hypothyroid); hearing loss; vision
impairment requiring glasses (corrective lenses); and
a 20-times greater chance of developing leukemia
(a blood disorder).
Development in a baby and child with Down
syndrome occurs at a much slower than normal rate.
Because of weak, floppy muscles (hypotonia), babies
learn to sit up, crawl, and walk much later than their
normal peers. Talking is also quite delayed. The level
of mental retardation is considered to be mild-tomoderate in Down syndrome. The actual IQ range of
Down syndrome children is quite varied, but the
majority of such children are in what is sometimes
known as the trainable range. This means that most
people with Down syndrome can be trained to do
regular self-care tasks, function in a socially appropriate manner in a normal home environment, and even
hold simple jobs.
As people with Down syndrome age, they face an
increased chance of developing the brain disease called
Alzheimer’s (sometimes referred to as dementia or senility). Most people have a six in 100 risk of developing
Alzheimer’s, but people with Down syndrome have a
25 in 100 chance of the disease. In addition to an
increased risk of developing Alzheimer’s, patients with
DS show the first signs of the disease much earlier than
most people, often in their early 40s. Alzheimer’s disease causes the brain to shrink and to break down. The
number of brain cells decreases, and abnormal deposits
and structural rearrangements occur. This process
results in a loss of brain functioning. People with
Alzheimer’s have strikingly faulty memories. Over
time, people with Alzheimer’s disease will lapse into an
increasingly unresponsive state. Some researchers have
shown that even Down syndrome patients who do not
appear to have Alzheimer’s disease have the same
changes occurring to the structures and cells of their
brains. A new questionnaire was published in 2004 to
help doctors evaluate adults with Down syndrome for
symptoms of Alzheimer’s-related dementia.
As people with Down syndrome age, they also
have an increased chance of developing a number of
other illnesses, including cataracts, thyroid problems,
diabetes, and seizure disorders.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is usually suspected at birth, when the
characteristic physical signs of Down syndrome are
noted. Once this suspicion has been raised, genetic
testing (chromosome analysis) can be undertaken in
order to verify the presence of the disorder. This testing is usually done on a blood sample, although chromosome analysis can also be done on other types of
tissue, including skin. The cells to be studied are prepared in a laboratory. Chemical stain is added to make
the characteristics of the cells and the chromosomes
stand out. Chemicals are added to prompt the cells to
go through normal development, up to the point
where the chromosomes are most visible, prior to cell
division. At this point, they are examined under a
microscope and photographed. The photograph is
used to sort the different sizes and shapes of chromosomes into pairs. In most cases of Down syndrome,
one extra chromosome 21 will be revealed. The final
result of such testing, with the photographed chromosomes paired and organized by shape and size, is called
the individual’s karyotype.
Treatment
No treatment is available to cure Down syndrome.
Treatment is directed at addressing the individual concerns of a particular patient. For example, heart defects
will many times require surgical repair, as will duodenal atresia. Many Down syndrome patients will need to
wear glasses to correct vision. Patients with hearing
impairment benefit from hearing aids.
A drug known as piracetam received some attention in the treatment of Down syndrome patients in
the mid-1990s. Piracetam is a so-called ‘‘smart drug’’
that is marketed in Europe and Japan to normal adults
hoping to increase their cognitive abilities. It is also
sold to skiers and mountain climbers as a remedy for
loss of concentration at high altitudes. Although some
European researchers have studied piracetam as a
possible treatment for dementia in Alzheimer’s disease, none of these trials have shown as of 2004 that
the drug is of any benefit to Alzheimer’s patients.
Piracetam is not approved for use in the United
States; several large shipments of it were seized by
the Food and Drug Administration in 2004.
Piracetam can be obtained via the Internet but is not
recommended by mainstream medical practitioners.
In 1998 the European company licensed to produce piracetam, UCB Pharma in Belgium, issued a
statement discouraging its use in children with Down
syndrome. The company obtained orphan drug status
for piracetam from the FDA in the early 2000s and has
conducted a controlled trial of the drug as a possible
treatment for muscle spasms (myoclonus) in children.
While some decades ago, all Down syndrome children were quickly placed into institutions for lifelong
care. Research shows very clearly that the best outlook
for children with Down syndrome is a normal family
life in their own home. This approach, however,
requires careful support and education of the parents
and the siblings. It is a life-changing event to learn that
a new baby has a permanent condition that will effect
essentially all aspects of his or her development. Some
community groups exist to help families deal with the
emotional effects of this new information, and to help
plan for the baby’s future. Schools are required to
provide services for children with Down syndrome,
sometimes in separate special education classrooms,
and sometimes in regular classrooms. This educational practice is called mainstreaming or inclusion.
Prognosis
The prognosis in Down syndrome is quite variable, depending on the types of complications (heart
defects, susceptibility to infections, development of
leukemia) of each individual baby. The severity of
the retardation can also vary significantly. Without
the presence of heart defects, about 90% of children
with Down syndrome live into their teens. People with
Down syndrome appear to go through the normal
physical changes of aging more rapidly, however.
The average age of death for an individual with
Down syndrome is about 50–55 years. The most common cause of death is heart disease.
Still, the prognosis for a baby born with Down
syndrome in the early 2000s is better than ever before.
Because of modern medical treatments, including antibiotics to treat infections and surgery to treat heart
defects and duodenal atresia, life expectancy has greatly
increased. Community and family support allows people with Down syndrome to have rich, meaningful relationships. Because of educational programs, some
people with Down syndrome are able to hold jobs.
Men with Down syndrome appear to be uniformly sterile (meaning that they are unable to have
offspring). Women with Down syndrome, however,
are fully capable of having babies. About 50% of
these babies, however, will also be born with Down
syndrome.
Prevention
Efforts at prevention of Down syndrome are
aimed at genetic counseling of couples who are preparing to have babies. A counselor needs to inform
a woman that her risk of having a baby with Down
syndrome increases with her increasing age. Two types
of testing is available during a pregnancy to determine
if the baby being carried has Down syndrome.
Screening tests are used to estimate the chance
that an individual woman will have a baby with
Down syndrome. At 14–17 weeks of pregnancy,
measurements of a substance called AFP (alphafetoprotein) can be performed. AFP is normally
found circulating in the blood of a pregnant woman,
but may be unusually high or low with certain
disorders. Carrying a baby with Down syndrome
often causes AFP to be lower than normal. This information alone, or along with measurements of two
other hormones, is considered along with the mother’s
age to calculate the risk of the baby being born with
Down syndrome. These results are only predictions,
and are only correct about 60% of the time.
The only way to definitively establish (with about
98–99% accuracy) the presence or absence of Down
syndrome in a developing baby, is to test tissue from
the pregnancy itself. This is usually done either by
amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling (CVS). In
amniocentesis, a small amount of the fluid in which
the baby is floating is withdrawn with a long, thin
needle. In chorionic villus sampling, a tiny tube is
inserted into the opening of the uterus to retrieve a
small sample of the placenta (the organ that attaches
the growing baby to the mother via the umbilical cord,
and provides oxygen and nutrition). Both amniocentesis and CVS allow the baby’s own karyotype to be
determined. A couple must then decide whether to use
this information in order to begin to prepare for the
arrival of a baby with Down syndrome, or to terminate the pregnancy.
Once a couple has had one baby with Down syndrome, they are often concerned about the likelihood
of future offspring also being born with the disorder.
Most research indicates that this chance remains the
same as for any woman at a similar age. However,
when the baby with Down syndrome has the type that
results from a translocation, it is possible that one of
the two parents is a carrier of that defect. A carrier
conveys the genetic defect to the next generation but
does not actually have the disorder. When one parent
is a carrier of a translocation, the chance of future
offspring having Down syndrome is greatly increased.
The specific risk requires evaluation by a genetic
counselor.