Definition
These drugs are used to induce (start) or continue
labor.
Purpose
The drug decribed here, oxytocin, makes the
uterus (womb) contract. Physicians use it to deliberately start labor. Because there are some risks with
using oxytocin, this should be done only when there
are good medical reasons. Any woman who is being
given oxytocin should make sure she has discussed the
benefits and risks with her physician.
Oxytocin also may be used to control bleeding
after delivery or to help make the milk flow in
women who are breastfeeding their babies.
Description
Oxytocin is a hormone and is available only with a
physician’s prescription. When used to start or continue labor, it is slowly injected into a vein. A nasal
spray form is used to increase milk flow in breastfeeding. Some commonly used brand names are Pitocin
and Syntocinon.
Recommended dosage
The dosages given here are average doses.
However, doses may be different for different patients.
Follow the orders of the physician who prescribed
the drug.
For increasing milk production:
One spray into one or both nostrils, two–three
minutes before nursing or using a breast pump.
For starting or continuing labor:
The physician in charge will determine the appropriate dose.
Precautions
Oxytocin does not help increase or continue labor
in all patients. When it does not help, the physician
may deliver the baby by cesarean section.
In women who are especially sensitive to oxytocin,
the drug may cause contractions to become too strong.
This could tear the uterus or deprive the fetus of blood
and oxygen during labor.
Oxytocin does not help improve milk flow in all
women who are breastfeeding. Check with a physician
if the drug does not seem to be working.
Women with heart disease, high blood pressure,
or kidney disease should let their physicians know
about these conditions before taking oxytocin. Also,
anyone who has had an unusual reaction to oxytocin
in the past should inform their physician.
Side effects
Oxytocin has caused irregular heartbeat and
increased bleeding in some women after delivery. It
may also cause jaundice (yellowing of the eyes and
skin) in newborns.Other side effects are rare, but may include
nausea, vomiting, confusion, dizziness, convulsions,
breathing problems, headache, hives, skin rash, itching,
pelvic or abdominal pain, and weakness. The nasal
spray form may cause watery eyes or irritation of
the nose.
Interactions
Anyone who takes oxytocin should let the physician know all other medicines she is taking.