Definition
Drug therapy monitoring, also known as
Therapeutic Drug Monitoring (TDM), is a means of
monitoring drug levels in the blood.
Purpose
TDM is employed to measure blood drug levels
so that the most effective dosage can be determined,
with toxicity prevented. TDM is also utilized to
identify noncompliant patients (those patients
who, for whatever reason, either cannot or will not
comply with drug dosages as prescribed by the
physician).
Precautions
Because so many different factors influence
blood drug levels, the following points should be
taken into consideration during TDM: the age and
weight of the patient; the route of administration of
the drug; the drug’s absorption rate, excretion rate,
delivery rate, and dosage; other medications the
patient is taking; other diseases the patient has; the
patient’s compliance regarding the drug treatment
regimen; and the laboratory methods used to test
for the drug.
Description
TDM is a practical tool that can help the physician provide effective and safe drug therapy in
patients who need medication. Monitoring can be
used to confirm a blood drug concentration level
that is above or below the therapeutic range, or if
the desired therapeutic effect of the drug is not as
expected. If this is the case, and dosages beyond
normal then have to be prescribed, TDM can minimize the time that elapses.
TDM is important for patients who have other
diseases that can affect drug levels, or who take other
medicines that may affect drug levels by interacting
with the drug being tested. As an example, without
drug monitoring, the physician cannot be sure if a
patient’s lack of response to an antibiotic reflects
bacterial resistance, or is the result of failure to reach
the proper therapeutic range of antibiotic concentration in the blood. In cases of life-threatening infections, timing of effective antibiotic therapy is critical
to success. It is equally crucial to avoid toxicity in a
seriously ill patient. Therefore, if toxic symptoms
appear with standard dosages, TDM can be used to
determine changes in dosing.
Drawn blood, used for TDM, demonstrates a
drug action in the body at any specific time, whereas
drug levels examined from urine samples reflect the
presence of a drug over many days (depending on the
rate of excretion). Therefore, blood testing is the
procedure of choice when definite data are required.
However, for adequate absorption and therapeutic
levels to be accurate, it is important to allow for
sufficient time to pass between the administration of
the medication and the collection of the blood
sample.
Blood specimens for drug monitoring can be
taken at two different times: during the drug’s highest
therapeutic concentration (‘‘peak’’ level), or its lowest
(‘‘trough’’ level). Occasionally called residual levels,
trough levels show sufficient therapeutic levels;
whereas peak levels show poisoning (toxicity). Peak
and trough levels should fall within the therapeutic
range.
Preparation
In preparing for this test, the following guidelines
should be observed:
 Depending on the drug to be tested, the physician
should decide if the patient is to be fasting (nothing
to eat or drink for a specified period of hours) before
the test.
 For patients suspected of symptoms of drug toxicity,
the best time to draw the blood specimen is when the
symptoms are occurring.
 If there is a question as to whether an adequate dose
of the drug is being achieved, it is best to obtain
trough (lowest therapeutic concentration) levels.
 Peak (highest concentration) levels are usually
obtained one to two hours after oral intake, approximately one hour after intramuscular (IM) administration (a shot in the muscle), and approximately
30 minutes after intravenous (IV) administration.
Residual, or trough, levels are usually obtained
within 15 minutes of the next scheduled dose.
Risks
Risks for this test are minimal, but may include
slight bleeding from the blood-drawing site, fainting
or feeling lightheaded after blood is drawn, or accumulation of blood under the puncture site
(hematoma).