Definition
A drug overdose is the accidental or intentional
use of a drug or medicine in an amount that is higher
than is normally used.
Description
All drugs have the potential to be misused,
whether legally prescribed by a doctor, purchased
over-the-counter at the local drug store, or bought
illegally on the street. Taken in combination with
other drugs or with alcohol, even drugs normally considered safe can cause death or serious long term consequences. Children are particularly at risk for
accidental overdose, accounting for over one million
poisonings each year from drugs, alcohol, and other
chemicals and toxic substances. People who suffer
from depression and who have suicidal thoughts are
also at high risk for drug overdose.
Causes and symptoms
Accidental drug overdose may be the result of
misuse of prescription medicines or commonly used
medications like pain relievers and cold remedies.
Symptoms differ depending on the drug taken. Some
of the drugs commonly involved in overdoses are listed
below along with symptoms and outcomes.
Acetaminophen is the generic name for the commonly used pain reliever Tylenol. Overdose of this
drug causes liver damage with symptoms that include
loss of appetite, tiredness, nausea and vomiting, paleness, and sweating. The next stage of symptoms indicates liver failure and includes abdominal pain and
tenderness, swelling of the liver, and abnormal blood
tests for liver enzymes. In the last stage of this
poisoning, liver failure advances and the patient
becomes jaundiced, with yellowing of the skin and
whites of the eyes. They may also experience kidney
failure, bleeding disorders, and encephalopathy (swelling of the brain).
Anticholinergic drugs (drugs that block the action
of acetylcholine, a neurotransmitter) like atropine,
scopolamine, belladonna, antihistamines, and antipsychotic agents cause the skin and moist tissues (like in
the mouth and nose) to become dry and flushed.
Dilated pupils, an inability to urinate, and mental
disturbances are also symptoms. Severe toxicity can
lead to seizures, abnormal heart rhythms, extremely
high blood pressure, and coma.
Antidepressant drugs like amitriptyline, desipramine, and nortriptyline can cause irregular heart
rate, vomiting, low blood pressure, confusion, and
seizures. An overdose of antidepressants also causes
symptoms similar to those seen with anticholinergic
drug overdoses.
Cholinergic drugs (drugs that stimulate the parasympathetic nervous system) like carbamate and pilocarpine cause nausea, diarrhea, increased secretion of
body fluids (sweat, tears, saliva, and urine), fatigue,
and muscle weakness. Convulsions are possible.
Death can occur due to respiratory failure and heart
failure.
Cocaine and crack cocaine overdoses cause seizures, high blood pressure, increased heart rate, paranoia, and other changes in behavior. Heart attack or
stroke are serious risks within three days after cocaine
overdose.
Depressant drugs (tranquilizers, antianxiety
drugs, sleeping pills) cause sleepiness, slowed or
slurred speech, difficulty walking or standing, blurred
vision, impaired ability to think, disorientation, and
mood changes. Overdose symptoms can include
slowed breathing, very low blood pressure, stupor,
coma, shock, and death.
Digoxin, a drug used to regulate the heart, can
cause irregular heart beats, nausea, confusion, loss of
appetite, and blurred vision.
Narcotics or opiates are drugs like heroin, morphine, and codeine. Clonidine and diphenoxylate
(Lomotil) are also in this category. Overdose with
opiate drugs causes sedation (sleepiness), low blood
pressure, slowed heart rate, and slowed breathing.
Pinpoint pupils, where the black centers of the eyes
become smaller than normal, are common in opiate
overdose. However, if other drugs are taken at the
same time as the opiates, they may counteract this
effect on the pupils. A serious risk is that the patient
will stop breathing.
Salicylates are found in aspirin and some creams
or ointments used for muscle and joint pain (like BenGay), and creams for psoriasis, a skin condition. Initial
symptoms are gastrointestinal irritation, fever, and
vomiting, possibly with blood in the vomit. This overdose will cause metabolic acidosis and respiratory alkalosis, conditions where the body’s acid/base balance is
malfunctioning. Symptoms include rapid heart beat
and fast breathing. Nervous system symptoms include
confusion, hallucinations, tiredness, and ringing in the
ears. An increased tendency to bleed is also common.
Serious complications include acute renal failure,
coma, and heart failure. Acute salicylate poisoning
can lead to death.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of a drug overdose may be based on the
symptoms that develop, however, the drug may do
extensive damage to the body before significant symptoms develop. If the patient is conscious, he or she may
be able to tell what drugs were taken and in what
amounts. The patient’s recent medical and social history may also help in a diagnosis. For example, a list of
medications that the patient takes, whether or not
alcohol was consumed recently, even if the patient
has eaten in the last few hours before the overdose,
can be valuable in determining what was taken and
how fast it will be absorbed into the system.
Different drugs have varying effects on the body’s
acid/base balance and on certain elements in the blood
like potassium and calcium. Blood tests can be used to
detect changes in body chemistry that may give clues
to what drugs were taken. Blood can also be screened
for various drugs in the system. Once the overdose
drug is identified, blood tests can be used to monitor
how fast the drug is being cleared out of the body.
Urine tests can also be used to screen for some drugs
and to detect changes in the body’s chemistry. Blood
and urine tests may show if there is damage to the liver
or kidneys as a result of the overdose.
Treatment
Immediate care
If a drug overdose is discovered or suspected, and
the person is unconscious, having convulsions, or is
not breathing, call for emergency help immediately. If
the person who took the drug is not having symptoms,
do not wait to see if symptoms develop; call a poison
control center immediately. Providing as much
information as possible to the poison control center
can help determine what the next course of action
should be.
The poison control center, paramedics, and emergency room staff will want to know:
 What drug(s) were taken try to locate the drug’s
container?
 How much of the drug was taken?
 When was the drug taken?
 Was the drug taken with alcohol or any other drugs
or chemicals?
 What is the age of the patient?
 What symptoms are the patient experiencing?
 Is the patient conscious?
 Is the patient breathing?
The poison control center may recommend trying
to get the patient to vomit. A liquid called ipecac
syrup, which is used to induce vomiting, is available
from pharmacies without a prescription. Pediatricians
may recommend that families keep ipecac syrup on
hand in households with children. This medication
should be used only on the advice of a medical professional. Vomiting should not be induced if the patient is
unconscious.
Emergency care
Emergency medical treatment may include:
 Assessment of the patient’s airway and breathing to
making sure that the trachea, the passage to the
lungs, is not blocked. If needed, a tube may be
inserted through the mouth and into the trachea to
help the patient breath. This procedure is called
intubation.
 Assessment of the patient’s heart rate, blood pressure, body temperature, and other physical signs that
might indicate the effects of the drug.
 Blood and urine samples may be collected to test for
the presence of the suspected overdose drug, and any
other drugs or alcohol that might be present.
 Elimination of the drug that has not yet been
absorbed is attempted. Vomiting may be induced
using ipecac syrup or other drugs that cause vomiting. Ipecac syrup should not be given to patients who
overdosed with tricyclic antidepressants, theophylline, or any drug that causes a significant change in
mental status. If a patient vomits while unconscious,
there is a serious risk of choking.
Gastric lavage, or washing out the stomach, may be
attempted. For this procedure a tube flexible tube is
inserted through the nose, down the throat, andinto the
stomach. The contents of the stomach are then suctioned out through the tube. A solution of saline (salt
water) is injected into the tube to rinse out the stomach.
This solution is then suctioned out. This is the process
used when someone has his/her stomach pumped.
 Activated charcoal is sometimes given to absorb the
drug.
 Medication to stimulate urination or defecation may
be given to try to flush the excess drug out of the
body faster.
 Intravenous (IV) fluids may be given. An intravenous
line, a needle inserted into a vein, may be put into the
arm or back of the hand.Fluids, either sterile saline (salt
water solution) or dextrose (sugar water solution), can
be administered through this line. Increasing fluids can
help to flush the drug out of the system and to reestablish balance of fluids and minerals in the body. The pH
(acid/base balance) of the body may need to be corrected by administering electrolytes like sodium, potassium, and bicarbonate through this IV line. If drugs
need to be administered quickly, they can also be
injected directly into the IV line.
 Hemodialysis is a procedure where blood is circulated out of the body, pumped through a dialysis
machine, then reintroduced back into the body.
This process can be used to filter some drugs out of
the blood. It may also be used temporarily or long
term if the kidneys are damaged due to the overdose.
 Antidotes are available for some drug overdoses. An
antidote is another drug that counteracts or blocks
the overdose drug. For example, acetaminophen
overdose can be treated with an oral medication,
N-acetylcysteine (Mucomyst), if the level of acetaminophen found in the blood is extremely high.
Naloxone is an anti-narcotic drug that is given to
counteract narcotic poisoning. Nalmefen or methadone may also be used.
 Psychiatric evaluation may be recommended if the
drug overdose was taken deliberately.
Prognosis
While many victims of drug overdose recover
without long term effects, there can be serious consequences. Some drug overdoses cause the failure of
major organs like the kidneys or liver, or failure of
whole systems like the respiratory or circulatory systems. Patients who survive drug overdose may need
kidney dialysis, kidney or liver transplant, or ongoing
care as a result of heart failure, stroke, or coma. Death
can occur in almost any drug overdose situation, particularly if treatment is not started immediately.
Prevention
To protect children from accidental drug overdose, all medications should be stored in containers
with child resistant caps. All drugs should be out of
sight and out of reach of children, preferably in a
locked cabinet. Prescription medications should be
used according to directions and only by the person
whose name is on the label. Threats of suicide need to
be taken seriously and appropriate help sought for
people with depression or other mental illness that
may lead to suicide.