Definition
Dry mouth, known medically as xerostomia, is the
abnormal reduction of saliva due to medication,
disease, or medical therapy.
Description
Dry mouth due to the lack of saliva can be a
serious medical problem. Decreased salivation can
make swallowing difficult, can decrease taste sensation, and can promote tooth decay.
Causes and symptoms
Dry mouth, resulting from thickened or reduced
saliva flow, can be caused by a number of factors:
medications, both prescription and over-the-counter;
such systemic diseases as anemia, HIV infection, or
diabetes, manifestations of Sjo¨gren’s syndrome
(as rheumatoid arthritis, lupus, chronic hardening
and thickening of the skin, or chronic and progressive
inflammation of skeletal muscles); infections of the
salivary glands; blockage of the salivary ducts caused
by stones or tumors forming in the ducts through
which the saliva passes; dehydration; such medical
therapies as local surgery or radiation; secretion
reduction normally involved in the aging process;
and emotional stress.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of dry mouth is not difficult. The
patient will state that his or her saliva is very thick or
nonexistent. Finding the cause of dry mouth may be
more difficult and require some laboratory testing.
Salivary gland biopsy for stones or tumors should be
performed if indicated.
Treatment
The treatment of dry mouth involves the management of the condition causing it. If dry mouth is
caused by medication, the medication should be changed. If dry mouth is caused by blockage of the salivary
ducts, the cause of the blockage should be investigated. When systemic diseases, such as diabetes and
anemia, are brought under control dry mouth
problems may decrease.
The use of caffeine-containing beverages, alcoholic beverages, and mouthwashes containing alcohol
should be minimized. The drinking of water and fruit
juices will decrease dry mouth problems. Chewing
gum and lemon drops can be used to stimulate saliva
flow. Bitters also can initiate salivary flow as long as
the salivary glands and ducts are functional.
Commercial saliva substitutes are available without
prescription and can be used as frequently as needed.
Use of a humidifier in the bedroom reduces nighttime
oral dryness.
Dry mouth caused by the aging process or radiation therapy for cancer can be treated by such oral
medications as pilocarpine (Salagen). Drugs that are
given to increase the flow of saliva are known as
sialogogues.
Prognosis
The prognosis for patients with xerostomia due
to medication problems is good, if the offending
agent can be changed. Dry mouth due to systemic
problems may be eliminated or improved once the
disease causing the dry mouth is under control.
Persistent xerostomia can be managed well with
saliva substitutes.
Prevention
A patient needs to ask his or her health care
provider if any medication to be prescribed will cause
dry mouth. Patients with persistent xerostomia need to
practice good oral hygiene and visit a dentist on a
regular basis; the lack of adequate saliva can cause
severe dental decay. The salivary glands are very sensitive to radiation, so any patient scheduled for radiation therapy of the head and neck needs to discuss with
the radiation therapist ways to minimize exposure of
the salivary glands to radiation.