Definition
Duodenal obstruction is a failure of food to pass
out of the stomach either from a complete or partial
obstruction.
Description
The duodenum is the first part of the intestine,
into which the stomach, the gall bladder, and the
pancreas empty their contents. The pylorus connects
the duodenum with the stomach and contains the
valve that regulates stomach emptying. Obstruction
usually occurs right at this outlet, so that the gall
bladder and pancreas are unable to drain their secretions without hindrance.
Causes and symptoms
Obstruction of the duodenum occurs in adults
and infants, each for a different set of reasons. In
adults, the usual cause is a peptic ulcer of such
antiquity that repeated cycles of injury and scarring have narrowed the passageway. Medical treatment of ulcers has progressed to the point where
such obstinate ulcer disease is rarely seen any
more. In infants, the conditions are congenital–
either the channel is underdeveloped or the pylorus
is overdeveloped. The first type is called duodenal
hypoplasia and the second is termed hypertrophic
pyloric stenosis. In rare cases, the channel
may be missing altogether, a condition called duodenal atresia. To say that these anomalies are
congenital is not to say their cause is understood.
As with most birth defects, the specific cause is not
known.
Food that cannot exit the stomach in the forward
direction will return whence it came. Vomiting is the
constant symptom of duodenal obstruction. It may be
preceded by indigestion and nausea as the stomach
attempts to squeeze its contents through an ever
narrowing outlet.
Hypertrophic pyloric stenosis appears soon after
birth. The infant will vomit feedings, lose weight, and
be restless and irritable.
Diagnosis
X rays taken with contrast material in the stomach
readily demonstrate the site of the blockage and often
the ulcer that caused it. Gastroscopy is another way to
evaluate the problem. In infants, x rays may not be
necessary to detect pyloric stenosis. It is often possible
to feel the enlarged pylorus, like an olive, deep under
the ribs and see the stomach rippling as it labors to
force food through.
Treatment
Bowel obstruction requires a surgeon, sometimes
immediately. Newer surgical techniques constantly
improve the outcome, but obstruction is a mechanical
problem that needs a mechanical solution. Most
adults who come to surgery for obstruction have suffered for years from peptic ulcer disease. They will
usually benefit from ulcer surgery at the same time
their obstruction is relieved. The surgeon will therefore select a procedure that combines relief of obstruction with remedy for ulcer disease. There are many
choices. In fact, even without obstruction, functional
considerations require ulcer surgery to include
enhancement of stomach emptying.
To treat an infant with hypertrophic pyloric stenosis, some surgeons have had success with forceful
balloon dilation of the pylorus done through a gastroscope, but the standard procedure is to cut across the
overdeveloped circular muscle that is constricting the
stomach outlet. There are reports of infant hypertrophic pyloric stenosis remitting without surgery
following a very careful feeding schedule, but mortality is unacceptably high.
Prognosis
A functioning and unrestricted intestine is a
prerequisite for living independent of the most
advanced and continuous medical care available.
Achieving this desirable goal is the rule with surgery for duodenal obstructions of all types. The
bowel is so malleable that there is a rearrangement
to suit every occasion. The variety of possible configurations is limited only by the surgeon’s
imagination.
Prevention
Prompt and effective treatment of peptic ulcers
will prevent chronic scarring and narrowing. Drugs
developed over the past few decades have all but
eliminated the need for ulcer surgery.