Definition
Dysentery is a general term for a group of gastrointestinal disorders characterized by inflammation of
the intestines, particularly the colon. Characteristic
features include abdominal pain and cramps, straining
at stool (tenesmus), and frequent passage of watery
diarrhea or stools containing blood and mucus. The
English word dysentery comes from two Greek words
meaning ‘‘ill’’ or ‘‘bad’’ and ‘‘intestine.’’
It should be noted that some doctors use the word
‘‘dysentery’’ to refer only to the first two major types
of dysentery discussed below, while others use the term
in a broader sense. For example, some doctors speak
of schistosomiasis, a disease caused by a parasitic
worm, as bilharzial dysentery, while others refer to
acute diarrhea caused by viruses as viral dysentery.
Description
Dysentery is a common but potentially serious
disorder of the digestive tract that occurs throughout
the world. It can be caused by a number of infectious
agents ranging from viruses and bacteria to protozoa
and parasitic worms; it may also result from chemical
irritation of the intestines. Dysentery is one of the
oldest known gastrointestinal disorders, having been
described as early as the Peloponnesian War in the
fifth century B.C. Epidemics of dysentery were
frequent occurrences aboard sailing vessels as well as
in army camps, walled cities, and other places in the
ancient world where large groups of human beings
lived together in close quarters with poor sanitation.
As late as the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries,
sailors and soldiers were more likely to die from the
‘‘bloody flux’’ than from injuries received in battle. It
was not until 1897 that a bacillus (rod-shaped bacterium) was identified as the cause of one major type of
dysentery.
Dysentery in the modern world is most likely to
affect people in the less developed countries and travelers who visit these areas. According to the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), most
cases of dysentery in the United States occur in immigrants from the developing countries and in persons
who live in inner-city housing with poor sanitation.
Other groups of people at increased risk of dysentery
are military personnel stationed in developing countries, frequent travelers, children in day care centers,
people in nursing homes, and men who have sex with
other men.
Causes & symptoms
Causes
The most common types of dysentery and their
causal agents are as follows:
 Bacillary dysentery. Bacillary dysentery, which is
also known as shigellosis, is caused by four species
of the genus Shigella: S. dysenteriae, the most virulent species and the one most likely to cause epidemics; S. sonnei, the mildest species and the most
common form of Shigella found in the United States;
 S. boydii; and S. flexneri. S. flexneri is the species that
causes Reiter’s syndrome, a type of arthritis that
develops as a late complication of shigellosis.
About 15,000 cases of shigellosis are reported to the
CDC each year for the United States; however, the
CDC maintains that the true number of annual cases
may be as high as 450,000, since the disease is vastly
underreported. About 85 percent of cases in the
United States are caused by S. sonnei. The Shigella
organisms cause the diarrhea and pain associated
with dysentery by invading the tissues that line the
colon and secreting an enterotoxin, or harmful
protein that attacks the intestinal lining.
 Amebic dysentery. Amebic dysentery, which is also
called intestinal amebiasis and amebic colitis, is
caused by a protozoon, Entamoeba histolytica.
 E. histolytica, whose scientific name means ‘‘tissuedissolving,’’ is second only to the organism that
causes malaria as a protozoal cause of death.
 E. histolytica usually enters the body during the cyst
stage of its life cycle. The cysts may be found in food
or water contaminated by human feces. Once in the
digestive tract, the cysts break down, releasing an
active form of the organism called a trophozoite.
The trophozoites invade the tissues lining the intestine, where they are usually excreted in the patient’s
feces. They sometimes penetrate the lining itself,
however, and enter the bloodstream. If that happens,
the trophozoites may be carried to the liver, lung, or
other organs. Involvement of the liver or other
organs is sometimes called metastatic amebiasis.
 Balantidiasis, giardiasis, and cryptosporidiosis.
These three intestinal infections are all caused
by protozoa, Balantidium coli, Giardia lamblia,
and Cryptosporidium parvum respectively.
Although most people infected with these protozoa do not become severely ill, the disease agents
may cause dysentery in children or immunocompromised individuals. There are about 3,500 cases
of cryptosporidiosis reported to the CDC each
year in the United States, and about 22,000
cases of giardiasis.
Viral dysentery. Viral dysentery, which is sometimes
called traveler’s diarrhea or viral gastroenteritis, is
caused by several families of viruses, including rotaviruses, caliciviruses, astroviruses, noroviruses, and
adenoviruses. There are about 3.5 million cases of
viral dysentery in infants in the United States each
year, and about 23 million cases each year in adults.
The CDC estimates that viruses are responsible for
9.2 million cases of dysentery related to food poisoning in the United States each year. Whereas most
cases of viral dysentery in infants are caused by
rotaviruses, caliciviruses are the most common disease agents in adults. Noroviruses were responsible
for about half of the outbreaks of dysentery on cruise
ships reported to the CDC in 2002.
 Dysentery caused by parasitic worms. Both whipworm (trichuriasis) and flatworm or fluke (schistosomiasis) infestations may produce the violent
diarrhea and abdominal cramps associated with
dysentery. Schistosomiasis is the second most widespread tropical disease after malaria. Although the
disease is rare in the United States, travelers to countries where it is endemic may contract it. The World
Health Organization (WHO) estimates that about
200 million people around the world carry the parasite in their bodies, with 20 million having severe
disease.
Symptoms
In addition to the characteristic bloody and/or
watery diarrhea and abdominal cramps of dysentery,
the various types have somewhat different symptom
profiles:
 Bacillary dysentery. The symptoms of shigellosis
may range from the classical bloody diarrhea and
tenesmus characteristic of dysentery to the passage
of nonbloody diarrhea that resembles the loose
stools caused by other intestinal disorders. The high
fever associated with shigellosis begins within one to
three days after exposure to the organism. The
patient may also have pain in the rectum as well as
abdominal cramping. The acute symptoms last for
three to seven days, occasionally for as long as a
month. Bacillary dysentery may lead to two potentially fatal complications outside the digestive tract:
bacteremia (bacteria in the bloodstream), which is
most likely to occur in malnourished children; and
hemolytic uremic syndrome, a type of kidney failure
that has a mortality rate above 50 percent.
 Amebic dysentery. Amebic dysentery often has a
slow and gradual onset; most patients with amebiasis
visit the doctor after several weeks of diarrhea and
bloody stools. Fever is unusual with amebiasis unless
the patient has developed a liver abscess as a complication of the infection. The most serious complication of amebic dysentery, however, is fulminant or
necrotizing colitis, which is a severe inflammation of
the colon characterized by dehydration, severe
abdominal pain, and the risk of perforation (rupture)
of the colon.
 Dysentery caused by other protozoa. Dysentery
associated with giardiasis begins about 1–3 weeks
after infection with the organism. It is characterized
by bloating and foul-smelling flatus, nausea and
vomiting, headaches, and low-grade fever. These
acute symptoms usually last for three or four days.
The symptoms of cryptosporidiosis are mild in most
patients but are typically severe in patients with AIDS. Diarrhea usually starts between seven and
10 days after exposure to the organism and may be
copious. The patient may have pain in the upper
right abdomen, nausea, and vomiting, but fever is
unusual.
 Viral dysentery. Viral dysentery has a relatively rapid
onset; symptoms may begin within hours of infection. The patient may be severely dehydrated from
the diarrhea but usually has only a low-grade fever.
The diarrhea itself may be preceded by one to three
days of nausea and vomiting. The patient’s abdomen
may be slightly tender but is not usually severely
painful.
 Dysentery caused by parasitic worms. Patients with
intestinal schistosomiasis typically have a gradual
onset of symptoms. In addition to bloody diarrhea
and abdominal pain, these patients usually have fatigue. An examination of the patient’s colon will
usually reveal areas of ulcerated tissue, which is the
source of the bloody diarrhea.
Diagnosis
Patient history and physical examination
The physical examination in the primary care doctor’s office will not usually allow the doctor to determine the specific parasite or other disease agent that is
causing the bloody diarrhea and other symptoms of
dysentery, although the presence or absence of fever
may help to narrow the diagnostic possibilities. The
patient’s age and history are usually better sources
of information. The doctor may ask about such matters as the household water supply and food preparation habits, recent contact with or employment in a
nursing home or day care center, recent visits to
tropical countries, and similar questions. The doctor will also need to know when the patient first noticed
the symptoms.
The doctor will also evaluate the patient for signs
of dehydration resulting from the loss of fluid through
the intestines. Fatigue, drowsiness, dryness of the
mucous membranes lining the mouth, low blood pressure, loss of normal skin tone, and rapid heartbeat
(above 100 beats per minute) may indicate that the
patient is dehydrated.
Laboratory tests
The most common laboratory test to determine
the cause of dysentery is a stool sample. The patient
should be asked to avoid using over-the-counter antacids or antidiarrheal medications until the sample has
been collected, as these preparations can interfere with
the test results. The organisms that cause cryptosporidiosis, bacillary dysentery, amebic dysentery, and
giardiasis can be seen under the microscope, as can
the eggs produced by parasitic worms. In some cases
repeated stool samples, a sample of mucus from the
intestinal lining obtained through a proctoscope, or a
tissue sample from the patient’s colon may be necessary to confirm the diagnosis. Antigen testing of a
stool sample can be used to diagnose a rotavirus infection as well as parasitic worm infestations.
The doctor will also usually order a blood test to
evaluate the electrolyte levels in the patient’s blood in
order to assess the need for rehydration.
Imaging studies
Imaging studies (usually CT scans, x rays, or
ultrasound) may be performed in patients with amebic
dysentery to determine whether the lungs or liver have
been affected. They may also be used to diagnose
schistosomiasis, as the eggs produced by the worms
will show up on ultrasound or MRI studies of the liver,
intestinal wall, or bladder.
Treatment
Medications are the primary form of treatment
for dysentery:
 Bacillary dysentery. Dysentery caused by Shigella is
usually treated with such antibiotics as trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole (Bactrim, Septra), nalidixic acid
(NegGram), or ciprofloxacin (Cipro, Ciloxan).
Because the various species of Shigella are becoming
resistant to these drugs, however, the doctor may
prescribe one of the newer drugs described below.
Patients with bacillary dysentery should not be given
antidiarrheal medications, including loperamide
(Imodium), paregoric, and diphenolate (Lomotil),
because they may make the illness worse.
 Amebic dysentery. The most common drugs given
for amebiasis are diloxanide furoate (Diloxide),
iodoquinol (Diquinol, Yodoxin), and metronidazole
(Flagyl). Metronidazole should not be given to pregnant women but paromomycin (Humatin) may be
used instead. Patients with very severe symptoms
may be given emetine dihydrochloride or dehydroemetine, but these drugs should be stopped once the
patient’s symptoms are controlled.
 Dysentery caused by other protozoa. Balantidiasis,
giardiasis, and cryptosporidiosis are treated with the
same drugs as amebic dysentery; patients with giardiasis resistant to treatment may be given albendazole (Zentel) or furazolidone (Furoxone).
 Viral dysentery. The primary concern in treating
viral dysentery, particularly in small children, is to
prevent dehydration. Antinausea and antidiarrhea
medications should not be given to small children.
Probiotics, including Lactobacillus casei and
Saccharomyces boulardii, have been shown to reduce
the duration and severity of viral diarrhea in small
children by 30–70 percent.
 Dysentery caused by parasitic worms. Whipworm
infestations are usually treated with anthelminthic medications, most commonly mebendazole
(Vermox). Schistosomiasis may be treated with praziquantel (Biltricide), metrifonate (Trichlorfon), or
oxamniquine, depending on the species causing the
infestation.
Newer drugs that have been developed to treat
dysentery include tinidazole (Tindamax, Fasigyn), an
antiprotozoal drug approved by the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) in 2004 to treat giardiasis and
amebiasis in adults and children over the age of three
years. This drug should not be given to women in the
first three months of pregnancy. In addition, adults
taking tinidazole should not drink alcoholic beverages
while using it, or for three days after the end of treatment. The other new drug is nitazoxanide (Alinia),
another antiprotozoal medication that has the advantage of lacking the bitter taste of metronidazole and
tinidazole.
Fluid replacement is given if the patient has shown
signs of dehydration. The most common treatment is
an oral rehydration fluid containing a precise amount
of salt and a smaller amount of sugar to replace electrolytes as well as water lost through the intestines.
Infalyte and Pedialyte are oral rehydration fluids formulated for the special replacement needs of infants
and young children.Surgery
Surgery is rarely necessary in treating dysentery,
but may be required in cases of fulminant colitis,
particularly if the patient’s colon has perforated.
Patients with liver abscesses resulting from amebic
dysentery may also require emergency surgery if the
abscess ruptures. In some cases exploratory surgery
may be needed to determine whether severe abdominal
pain is caused by schistosomiasis, amebic dysentery,
or appendicitis.
Alternative treatments
There are a number of alternative treatments for
dysentery, most of which are derived from plants used
by healers for centuries. Because dysentery was known
to ancient civilizations as well as modern societies,
such alternative systems as traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) and Ayurvedic medicine developed treatments for it.
Ayurvedic medicine
Ayurvedic medicine recommends fruits and herbs,
specifically cumin seed, bael fruit (Aegle marmelos,
also known as Bengal quince), and arjuna
(Terminalia arjuna) bark for the treatment of dysentery. Ayurvedic practitioners may also give the patient
dietary supplements known as Isabbael, Lashunadi
Bati, and Bhuwaneshar Ras. To rehydrate the body,
adult patients may be given a combination of slippery
elm water and barley to drink, at least a pint per day.
Traditional Chinese medicine
To treat dysentery, traditional Chinese doctors
use astringent drugs, which are intended to constrict
or tighten mucous membranes and other body tissues
to slow down fluid loss. Myrobalan fruit (Terminalia
chebula), nut galls (swellings produced on the leaves
and stems of oak trees by the secretions of certain
insects), and opium extracted from the opium poppy
(Papaver somniferum) are the natural materials most
commonly used. Paregoric, a water-based solution of
morphine that is still used in the West to treat diarrhea, is derived from the opium poppy.
Other plant-based remedies
Researchers in Mexico reported in early 2005 that
the roots of Geranium mexicanum, a plant that produces a sap traditionally used to treat coughs or diarrhea, contains compounds that are active against both
Giardia lamblia and Entamoeba histolytica. Plant biologists in Africa are studying the effectiveness of
African mistletoe (Tapinanthus dodoneifolius), a traditional remedy for dysentery among the Hausa and
Fulani tribes of Nigeria.
Dietary supplements
A study published in the American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition in early 2005 reported that supplemental zinc (twice the recommended daily dietary
allowance) boosts the body’s immune response during
acute shigellosis.
Homeopathy
There are at least ten different homeopathic remedies used to treat diarrhea. Contemporary homeopaths, however, distinguish between diarrhea that
can be safely treated at home with such homeopathic
remedies as Podophyllum, Veratrum album, Bryonia,
and Arsenicum, and diarrhea that indicates dysentery
and should be referred to a physician. Signs of dehydration (loss of normal skin texture, dry mouth,
sunken eyes), severe abdominal pain, blood in the
stool, and unrelieved vomiting are all indications that
mainstream medical care is required.
Prognosis
Most adults in developed countries recover completely from an episode of dysentery. Children are at
greater risk of becoming dehydrated, however; bacillary dysentery in particular can lead to a child’s death
from dehydration in as little as 12–24 hours.
 Bacillary dysentery. Most patients recover completely from shigellosis, although their bowel habits
may not become completely normal for several
months. About 3 percent of people infected by S. flexneri will develop Reiter’s syndrome, which
may lead to a chronic form of arthritis that is difficult
to treat. Elderly patients or those with weakened
immune systems sometimes develop secondary bacterial infections after an episode of shigellosis.
 Amebic dysentery. Most people in North America who
become infected with E. histolytica do not become
severelyill. Patients who develop a severe case of amebic
dysentery, however, are at increased risk for such complications as fulminant colitis or liver abscess. About 0.5
percent of patients with amebic dysentery develop fulminant colitis, but almost half of these patients die.
Between 2 and 7 percent of cases of amebic liver abscess
resultin rupture of the abscesswith ahighmortality rate.
Men are 7–12 timesmorelikely to develop aliver abscess
than women. Any patient diagnosed with amebic dysentery should have stool samples examined for relapse
1, 3, and 6 months after treatment with medications
whether or not they have developed complications.
 Dysentery caused by otherprotozoa. Cryptosporidiosis
may lead to respiratory infections or pancreatitis in
patients with AIDS. The risk of these complications,
however, is reduced in AIDS patients who are receiving
highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART).
 Viral dysentery. Most people in North America
recover completely without complications unless
they become severely dehydrated. Viral dysentery in
children in developing countries, however, is a major
cause of mortality.
 Dysentery causedby parasitic worms.Untreated whipworm infections can lead to loss of appetite, chronic
diarrhea, and retarded growth in children. Untreated
schistosomiasis can develop into a chronic intestinal
disorder in which fibrous tissue, small growths, or
strictures (abnormal narrowing) may form inside the
intestine. Patients treated for schistosomiasis should
have stool samples checked for the presence of worm
eggs 3 and 6 months after the end of treatment.
Prevention
The disease agents that cause dysentery do not
confer immunity against reinfection at a later date.
As of 2005 there are no vaccines for bacillary dysentery or amebic dysentery; however, a vaccine against
schistosomiasis is under investigation. An oral vaccine
against rotavirus infections was developed for small
children but was withdrawn in 2004 because it was
associated with an increased risk of small-bowel disorders. Newer vaccines against rotaviruses and caliciviruses are being developed as of 2005.
Public health measures
Public health measures to control the spread of
dysentery include the following:
 Requiring doctors to report cases of disease caused
by Shigella, Entamoeba histolytica, and other parasites that cause dysentery. Careful reporting allows
the CDC and state public health agencies to investigate local outbreaks and plan prevention efforts.
 Posting advisories for travelers about outbreaks of
dysentery and other health risks in foreign countries.
The Travelers’ Health section of the CDC website
(http://www.cdc.gov/travel/) is a good source of
up-to-date information.
 Instructing restaurant workers and other food handlers about proper methods of hand washing, food
storage, and food preparation.
 Instructing workers in day care centers and nursing
homes about the proper methods for changing and
cleaning soiled diapers or bedding.
 Inspecting wells, other sources of drinking water,
and swimming pools for evidence of fecal
contamination.
Personal precautions
Individuals can lower their risk of contracting
dysentery by the following measures:
 Not allowing anyone in the household who has been
diagnosed with amebic or bacillary dysentery to prepare food or pour water for others until their
doctor confirms that they are no longer carrying the
disease agent.
 Avoiding anal sex or oral-genital contacts.
 Washing the hands carefully with soap and water
after using the bathroom, and supervising the handwashing of children in day care centers or those at
home who are not completely toilet-trained.
 When traveling, drinking only boiled or treated
water, and eating only cooked hot foods or fruits
that can be peeled by the traveler.
 Avoiding swimming in fresh water in areas known to
have outbreaks of schistosomiasis.