Definition
An otoscope is a hand-held instrument with a tiny
light and a cone-shaped attachment called an ear speculum, which is used to examine the ear canal. An ear
examination is a normal part of most physical examinations by a doctor or nurse. It is also done when an
ear infection or other type of ear problem is suspected.
Purpose
An otoscope is used to look into the ear canal to
see the ear drum. Redness or fluid in the eardrum can
indicate an ear infection. Some otoscopes can deliver a
small puff of air to the eardrum to see if the eardrum
will vibrate (which is normal). This type of ear examination with an otoscope can also detect a build up of
wax in the ear canal, or a rupture or puncture of the
eardrum.
Precautions
No special precautions are required. However, if
an ear infection is present, an ear examination may
cause some discomfort or pain.
Description
An ear examination with an otoscope is usually
done by a doctor or a nurse as part of a complete physical
examination. The ears may also be examined if an ear
infection is suspected due to fever, ear pain, or hearing
loss. The patient will often be asked to tip the head
slightly toward the shoulder so the ear to be examined
is pointing up. The doctor or nurse may hold the ear lobe
as the speculum is inserted into the ear, and may adjust
the position of the otoscope to get a better view of the ear
canal and eardrum. Both ears are usually examined,
even if there seems to be a problem with just one ear.
Preparation
No special preparation is required prior to an ear
examination with an otoscope. The ear speculum,
which is inserted into the ear, is cleaned and sanitized
before it is used. The speculums come in various sizes,
and the doctor or nurse will select the size that will be
most comfortable for the patient’s ear.
Aftercare
If an ear infection is diagnosed, the patient may
require treatment with antibiotics. If there is a buildup
of wax in the ear canal, it might be rinsed or scraped out.
Risks
This type of ear examination is simple and generally
harmless. Caution should always be used any time an
object is inserted into the ear. This process could irritate
an infected external ear canal and could rupture an eardrum if performed improperly or if the patient moves.
Normal results
The ear canal is normally skin-colored and is
covered with tiny hairs. It is normal for the ear canal
to have some yellowish-brown earwax. The eardrum is typically thin, shiny, and pearly-white to light gray in
color. The tiny bones in the middle ear can be seen
pushing on the eardrum membrane like tent poles. The
light from the otoscope will reflect off of the surface of
the ear drum.
Abnormal results
An ear infection will cause the eardrum to look
red and swollen. In cases where the eardrum has
ruptured, there may be fluid draining from the middle
ear. A doctor may also see scarring, retraction of the
eardrum, or bulging of the eardrum.