Definition
Ear surgery is the treatment of diseases, injuries, or
deformations of the ear by operation with instruments.
Purpose
Ear surgery is performed to correct certain types
of hearing loss, and to treat diseases of, injuries to, or
deformities of the ear’s auditory tube, middle ear,
inner ear, and auditory and vestibular systems. Ear
surgery is commonly performed to treat conductive
hearing loss, persistent ear infections, unhealed perforated eardrums, congenital ear defects, and tumors.
Ear surgery is performed on children and adults.
In some cases, surgery is the only treatment; in others,
it is used only when more conservative medical treatment fails.
Precautions
The precautions vary, depending on the type of ear
surgery under consideration. For example, stapedectomy (removal of parts of the middle ear and insertion of
prosthesis parts) should not be performed on people
with external or middle ear infection or inner ear disease. For people with complete hearing loss in the other
ear, it should be performed cautiously. Microsurgery
for the removal of a cholesteatoma (a cyst-like mass of
cells in the middle ear) should not be performed on
patients who are extremely ill or have other medical
conditions. Tympanoplasty (any surgical procedure on
the eardrum or middle ear) should not be performed on
patients with chronic sinus or nasal problems or with
medical problems such as poorly controlled diabetes
and heart disease. Surgery for congenital microtia and
atresia (abscense of normal bodily openings, such as
the outer ear canal) should not be performed if the
middle ear space is totally or almost totally absent.
Description
Most ear surgery is microsurgery, performed with
an operating microscope to enable the surgeon to view
the very small structures of the ear. The use of minimally invasive laser surgery for middle ear procedures
is growing. Laser surgery reduces the amount of
trauma due to vibration, enhances coagulation, and
enables surgeons to access hard to reach places in the
middle ear. Laser surgery can be performed in an
office operating suite. Types of ear surgery include
stapedectomy, tympanoplasty, myringotomy and ear
tube surgery, ear surgery to repair a perforated
eardrum, cochlear implants, and tumor removal.
Stapedectomy
To restore hearing loss, which is usually due to
otosclerosis, stapedectomy is performed. Stapedectomy
is the removal of all or part of the stapes, one of the
bones in the middle ear, and replacement with a tiny
prosthesis. An incision is made in the middle ear,
the small bones are identified, and the stapes is
removed. The stainless steel wire and cellulose sponge
prosthesis is inserted, blood and fluid are drained,
and the wound is closed. Performed in a hospital or
outpatient surgical facility under local or general
anesthetic, full recovery takes about three weeks but
hearing should improve immediately.
Tympanoplasty
Tympanoplasty is performed to reconstruct the
eardrum after partial or total conductive hearing
loss, usually caused by chronic middle ear infections,
or perforations that do not heal. This is usually a same
day surgery, performed under either local or general
anesthesia. After making an incision in the ear to view
the perforation, the ear drum is elevated away from
the ear canal and lifted forward. If the bones of hearing (ossicular chain) are functioning, tissue is taken
from the ear and grafted to the eardrum to close the
perforation. A thin sheet of silastic and Gelfoam hold
the graft in place. The ear is stitched together, and a
sterile patch is placed on the outside of the ear canal.
Tympanoplasty is successful in over 90% of all cases.
The need for ossicular reconstruction (reconstruction
of tiny bones of the middle ear) is sometimes known
before surgery and even when identified during
surgery, can usually be done while reconstructing the
eardrum. If the gap between the anvil bone and the
stapes is small, a small piece of bone or cartilage from
the patient can be inserted; if is is large, the incus bone
is removed, modelled into a prosthesis, and reinserted
between the stapes and the malleus. Reconstruction
could also be achieved by inserting a strut made from
artificial bone. For tympanoplasty with ossicular
reconstruction, the patient usually stays in the hospital
overnight. The recovery period is about four weeks.
Myringotomy and ear tube surgery
Myringotomy and ear tube surgery is performed
to drain ear fluid and prevent ear infections when
antibiotics don’t work or when ear infections are
chronic. The process normalizes pressure in the middle
ear and decreases fluid accumulation. It is most
commonly performed on infants and children, in
whom ear infections are most frequent, and may be
done on one or both ears. The surgeon makes a small
hole in the ear drum, then uses suction to remove fluid.
A small ear tube of metal or plastic is inserted into the
ear drum to allow continual drainage. The tube
prevents infections as long as it stays in place, which
varies from six months to three years. When the tube
falls out, the hole grows over. As many of 25% of
children under the age of two who need ear tubes
may need them again. Myringotomy and ear tube
surgery is performed in a hospital, using a general
anesthetic for most children and a local anesthetic
for older children or adults. No anesthetic may be
used for infants. The procedure usually takes about
two hours. Most patients can go home the same day;
children under three years of age and those with
chronic diseases usually stay overnight.
Ear surgery for a perforated eardrum
Ear surgery for a perforated eardrum is only
performed in rare cases where it does not heal on its
own. In most cases, this is performed in a surgeon’s
office using a topical anesthetic. The surgeon scratches
the undersurface of the eardrum, stimulating the skin
to heal and the eardrum to close. A thin patch placed
on the eardrum’s outer surface allows the skin under
the eardrum to heal.
Cochlear implants
Cochlear implants stimulate nerve ends within the
inner ear, enabling deaf children to hear. The device has
a microphone that remains outside the ear, a processor
that selects and codes speech sounds, and a receiver/
stimulator to convert the coded sounds to electric
signals that stimulate the hearing nerve and are recognized by the brain as sound. During surgery, an incision
is made behind and slightly above the ear. A circular
hole is drilled in the bone to receive the device’s internal
coil. The mastoid bone leading to the middle ear is
opened to receive the electrodes. The internal coil is
inserted and secured, followed by the electrodes. The
wound is stitched up and when it heals, an external unit
comprised of a stimulator with a microphone is worn
behind the ear. Performed in a hospital under general
anesthesia, the operation takes about two hours and usually requires a hospital stay overnight. The patient
can resume normal activities in two to three weeks.
Ear surgery for tumors
Some ear tumors can be very serious and should
be removed surgically. For a tumor on the skin of the
ear canal, the skin is removed surgically, the bone
beneath it is drilled away and a skin graft is placed in
the ear canal. If the tumor is near the eardrum, the skin
of the ear canal and the eardrum are removed along
with the bone surrounding the ear canal. A skin graft is
placed on the bare bone. For basal cell cancers and low
grade glandular malignancies, surgical resection of the
ear canal is adequate. Squamous cell carcinoma, a
serious form of cancer, of the external ear canal
requires radical surgery, followed by radiation therapy. Cholesteatoma, a benign tumor caused by an
infection in a perforated eardrum that did not heal
properly and can destroy the bones of hearing, is
removed with microsurgery. Mastoidectomy is performed for mastoiditis, an inflammation of the middle
ear, if medical therapy does not work. Petrous apicectomy is performed to drain the petrous apicitis, the
bone between the middle ear and the clivis.
Ear surgery for congenital ear defects
Congenital atresia, the absence of the external ear
canal, and congenital microtia, abnormal growth of
the external ear, often occur together, although atresia
can occur without microtia. Surgery to reconstruct the
ear usually takes place when the child is four or five
years old and may require several operations. A facial
plastic surgeon and an ear surgeon work together,
repairing the microtia first and then the atresia.
During surgery, a bony opening is created over the
bones of hearing. The surfaces of the bony ear
canal are then relined with a skin graft from the
thigh or abdomen. Tissue from behind the eardrum
is used to create a new eardrum. In many cases, the
middle ear will also need to be reconstructed. Surgery
is performed in a hospital under general anesthesia.
Other types of ear surgery
Surgery may also be appropriate to remove multiple
bony overgrowths of the ear canal or in rare cases of
compromised auditory tube function, to narrow the tube.
Preparation
The preparation depends upon the type of ear
surgery performed. For many procedures, blood and
urine studies and hearing tests are conducted.
Aftercare
The type of aftercare depends upon the type of
surgery performed. In most cases, the ear(s) should be
kept dry and warm. Non-prescription drugs such as
acetaminophen can be used for pain.
Risks
The type of risk depends on the type of surgery
performed. Total hearing loss is rare.