Definition
Echinacea, or purple coneflower, is a perennial
herb of the Composite family, commonly known as
the daisy family. Most often referred to as the purple
coneflower, this hardy plant also known as Sampson
root, Missouri snakeroot, and rudbeckia. The prominent, bristly seed head inspired the generic name of the
plant, taken from the Greek word echinos meaning
hedgehog.
Description
Echinacea is a North American prairie native,
abundant in the Mid-west, and cultivated widely in
ornamental and medicinal gardens. The purple-pink
rays of the blossom droop downward from a brassy
hued center cone composed of many small, tubular
florets. The conspicuous flowers bloom singly on
stout, prickly stems from mid-summer to autumn.
Flower heads may grow to 4 in (10.16 cm) across.
The dark green leaves are opposite, entire, lanceolate,
toothed, and hairy with three prominent veins. The
narrow upper leaves are attached to the stem with
stalks. The lower leaves are longer, emerging from
the stem without a leaf stalk, and growing to 8 in
(20.32 cm) in length. The plant develops deep, slender,
black roots. Echinacea propagates easily from seed or
by root cuttings. However, due to its increasing
popularity as an herbal supplement, echinacea is
numbered among the 19 medicinal plants considered
at risk by the Vermont nonprofit organization, United
Plant Savers.
Purpose
Three species of echinacea are useful medicinally:
Echinacea augustifolia, Echinacea purpurea, and
Echinacea pallida. The entire plant has numerous
medicinal properties that act synergistically to good
effect. Echinacea is most often used to boost the
immune system and fight infection. Research has
shown that echinacea increases production of interferon in the body. It is antiseptic and antimicrobial,
with properties that act to increase the number of
white blood cells available to destroy bacteria and
slow the spread of infection. As a depurative, the
herbal extract cleanses and purifies the bloodstream,
and has been used effectively to treat boils. Echinacea
is vulnerary, promoting wound healing through the
action of a chemical substance in the root known as
caffeic acid glycoside. As an alterative and an
immuno-modulator, echinacea acts gradually to promote beneficial change in the entire system. It has also
been used to treat urinary infection and Candida
albicans infections. Echinacea is a febrifuge, useful in
reducing fevers. It is also useful in the treatment of
hemorrhoids. A tincture, or a strong decoction of
echinacea serves as an effective mouthwash for the
treatment of pyorrhea and gingivitis.
Native American plains Indians relied on echinacea as an all-purpose antiseptic. The Sioux tribe
valued the root as a remedy for snake bite, the
Cheyenne tribe chewed the root to quench thirst, and
another tribe washed their hands in a decoction of
echinacea to increase their tolerance of heat.
European settlers learned of the North American
herb’s many uses, and soon numerous echinaceabased remedies were commercially available from
pharmaceutical companies in the United States.
Echinacea was a popular remedy in the United States
through the 1930s. It was among many medicinal
herbs listed in the U.S. Pharmacopoeia, the official
United States government listing of pharmaceutical
raw materials and recipes. The herb fell out of popular
use in the United States with the availability of
antibiotics. In West Germany, over 200 preparations
are made from the species E. purpurea. Commercially
prepared salves, tinctures, teas, and extracts are
marketed using standardized extracts. Echinacea is
regaining its status in the United States as a household
medicine-chest staple in many homes. It is one of the
best-selling herbal supplements in United States
health food stores.
Clinical studies have found that the entire plant
possesses medicinal properties with varying levels of
effectiveness. Echinacea is of particular benefit in the
treatment of upper respiratory tract infections. Some
research has shown that echinacea activates the
macrophages that destroy cancer cells and pathogens.
When taken after cancer treatments, an extract of the
root has been found to increase the body’s production
of white blood cells. Echinacea has been shown to be
most effective when taken at the first sign of illness,
rather than when used as a daily preventative. Other
research has demonstrated the significant effect of
 E. purpurea root on reducing the duration and severity
of colds and flu. Some herbal references list only
the root as the medicinal part, others include the
