Definition
Echocardiography is a diagnostic test that uses
ultrasound waves to create an image of the heart
muscle. Ultrasound waves that rebound or echo off
the heart can show the size, shape, and movement of
the heart’s valves and chambers as well as the flow of
blood through the heart. Echocardiography may show
such abnormalities as poorly functioning heart valves
or damage to the heart tissue from a past heart attack.
Purpose
Echocardiography is used to diagnose certain
cardiovascular diseases. In fact, it is one of the most
widely used diagnostic tests for heart disease. It can
provide a wealth of helpful information, including
the size and shape of the heart, its pumping strength,
and the location and extent of any damage to its
tissues. It is especially useful for assessing diseases of
the heart valves. It not only allows doctors to evaluate
the heart valves, but it can detect abnormalities in the
pattern of blood flow, such as the backward flow of
blood through partly closed heart valves, known as
regurgitation. By assessing the motion of the heart
wall, echocardiography can help detect the presence
and assess the severity of coronary artery disease, as
well as help determine whether any chest pain is related
to heart disease. Echocardiography can also help
detect hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, in which the
walls of the heart thicken in an attempt to compensate
for heart muscle weakness. The biggest advantage to
echocardiography is that it is noninvasive (does not
involve breaking the skin or entering body cavities)
and has no known risks or side effects.
Precautions
Echocardiography is an extremely safe procedure
and no special precautions are required.
Description
Echocardiography creates an image of the heart
using ultra-high-frequency sound waves–sound waves
that are too high in frequency to be heard by the
human ear. The technique is very similar to ultrasound
scanning commonly used to visualize the fetus during
pregnancy.
An echocardiography examination generally lasts
between 15–30 minutes. The patient lies bare-chested
on an examination table. A special gel is spread over
the chest to help the transducer make good contact
and slide smoothly over the skin. The transducer, a
small hand-held device at the end of a flexible cable,
is placed against the chest. Essentially a modified
microphone, the transducer directs ultrasound waves
into the chest. Some of the waves get echoed (or
reflected) back to the transducer. Since different
tissues and blood all reflect ultrasound waves differently, these sound waves can be translated into a
meaningful image of the heart, which can be displayed
on a monitor or recorded on paper or tape. The
patient does not feel the sound waves, and the entire
procedure is painless. In fact, there are no known
side effects.
Occasionally, variations of the echocardiography
test are used. For example, Doppler echocardiography
employs a special microphone that allows technicians
to measure and analyze the direction and speed of
blood flow through blood vessels and heart valves.
This makes it especially useful for detecting and
evaluating regurgitation through the heart valves. By
assessing the speed of blood flow at different locations
around an obstruction, it can also help to precisely
locate the obstruction.
An exercise echocardiogram is an echocardiogram performed during exercise, when the heart
muscle must work harder to supply blood to the
body. This allows doctors to detect heart problems
that might not be evident when the body is at rest
and needs less blood. For patients who are unable to
exercise, certain drugs can be used to mimic the effects
of exercise by dilating the blood vessels and making
the heart beat faster.
Preparation
The patient removes any clothing and jewelry
above the chest.
Aftercare
No special measures need to be taken following
echocardiography.
Risks
There are no known risks associated with the use
of echocardiography.
Normal results
A normal echocardiogram shows a normal heart
structure and the normal flow of blood through the
heart chambers and heart valves. However, a normal
echocardiogram does not rule out the possibility of
heart disease.
Abnormal results
An echocardiogram may show a number of
abnormalities in the structure and function of the
heart, such as:
 thickening of the wall of the heart muscle (especially
the left ventricle)
 abnormal motion of the heart muscle
 blood leaking backward through the heart valves
(regurgitation)
 decreased blood flow through a heart valve (stenosis)