Definition
In an ectopic pregnancy, the fertilized egg implants
in a location outside the uterus and tries to develop
there. The word ectopic means ‘‘in an abnormal place
or position.’’ The most common site is the fallopian
tube, the tube that normally carries eggs from the ovary
to the uterus. However, ectopic pregnancy can also
occur in the ovary, the abdomen, and the cervical
canal (the opening from the uterus to the vaginal
canal). The phrases tubal pregnancy, ovarian pregnancy, cervical pregnancy, and abdominal pregnancy
refer to the specific area of an ectopic pregnancy.
Description
Once a month, an egg is produced in a woman’s
ovary and travels down the fallopian tube where it
meets the male’s sperm and is fertilized. In a normal
pregnancy the fertilized egg, or zygote, continues on its
passage down the fallopian tube and enters the uterus
in three to five days. The zygote continues to grow,
implanting itself securely in the wall of the uterus. The
zygote’s cells develop into the embryo (the organism in
its first two months of development) and placenta
(a spongy structure that lines the uterus and nourishes
the developing organism).
In a tubal ectopic pregnancy, the fertilized egg
cannot make it all the way down the tube because of
scarring or obstruction. The fallopian tube is too narrow for the growing zygote. Eventually the thin walls of
the tube stretch and may burst (rupture), resulting in
severe bleeding and possibly the death of the mother.
More than 95% percent of all ectopic pregnancies occur
in the fallopian tube. Only 1.5% develop in the abdomen; less than 1% develop in the ovary or the cervix.
Causes and symptoms
As many as 50% of women with ectopic pregnancies have a history of pelvic inflammatory disease
(PID). This is an infection of the fallopian tubes
(salpingitis) that can spread to the uterus or ovaries.
It is most commonly caused by the organisms
Gonorrhea and Chlamydia and is usually transmitted
by sexual intercourse.
Other conditions also increase the risk of ectopic
pregnancy. They include:
 Endometriosis. A condition in which the tissue that
normally lines the uterus is found outside the uterus,
and can block a fallopian tube.Exposure to diethylsilbestrol (DES) as a fetus. If a
woman’s mother took DES (a synthetic version of
the hormone estrogen) during pregnancy, the woman
may have abnormalities in her fallopian tubes that
can make ectopic pregnancy more likely.
 Taking hormones. Estrogen and progesterone are
hormones that regulate the menstrual cycle and may
be in medications prescribed by a doctor for birth
control or other reasons. Taking these hormones can
affect the interior lining of the fallopian tubes and
slow the movement of the fertilized egg down the
tube. Women who become pregnant in spite of taking
some progesterone-only contraceptives have a greater
chance of an ectopic pregnancy. Ectopic pregnancy is
also more likely when the ovaries are artificially
stimulated with hormones to produce eggs for in
vitro fertilization (a procedure in which eggs are
taken from a woman’s body, fertilized, and then
placed in the uterus in an attempt to conceive a child).
 Use of an intrauterine device (IUD). These contraceptive devices are designed to prevent fertilized eggs
from becoming implanted in the uterus, but they
have only a minimal effect on preventing ectopic
pregnancies. Therefore, if a woman becomes pregnant while using an IUD for contraception, the fertilized egg is more likely to be implanted someplace
other than the uterus. For example, among women
who become pregnant while using a progesteronebearing IUD, about 15% have ectopic pregnancies.
 Surgery on a fallopian tube. The risk of ectopic
pregnancy can be as high as 60% after undergoing
elective tubal sterilization, a procedure in which the
fallopian tubes are severed to prevent pregnancy.
Women who have successful surgery to reverse the
procedure are also more likely to have an ectopic
pregnancy.
Early symptoms
In an ectopic pregnancy all the hormonal changes
associated with a normal pregnancy may occur. The
early symptoms include: fatigue; nausea; a missed period; breast tenderness; low back pain; mild cramping
on one side of the pelvis; and abnormal vaginal bleeding, usually spotting.
Later symptoms
As the embryo grows too large for the confined
space in the tube, the first sign that something is wrong
may be a stabbing pain in the pelvis or abdomen. If the
tube has ruptured, blood may irritate the diaphragm
and cause shoulder pain. Other warning signs are
lightheadedness and fainting.
Diagnosis
To confirm an early diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy, the doctor must determine first that the patient
is pregnant and that the location of the embryo is
outside the uterus. If an ectopic pregnancy is suspected, the doctor will perform a pelvic examination
to locate the source of pain and to detect a mass in the
abdomen.
Several laboratory tests of the patient’s blood
provide information for diagnosis. Measurement of
the human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) level in
the patient’s blood serum is the most useful laboratory
test in the early stages. In a normal pregnancy, the
level of this hormone doubles about every two days
during the first 10 weeks. In an ectopic pregnancy, the
rate of the increase is much slower and the low hCG
for the stage of the pregnancy is a strong indication
that the pregnancy is abnormal. (It could also represent a miscarriage in progress.) The level is usually
tested several times over a period of days to determine
whether or not it is increasing at a normal rate.
Progesterone levels in the blood are also measured. Lower than expected levels can indicate that
the pregnancy is not normal.
An ultrasound examination may provide information about whether or not the pregnancy is ectopic. A
device called a transducer, which emits high frequency
sound waves, is moved over the surface of the patient’s
abdomen or inserted into the vagina. The sound waves
bounce off of the internal organs and create an image
on a screen. The doctor should be able to see whether
or not there is a fetus developing in the uterus after
at least five weeks of gestation. Before that point, a
normal pregnancy is too small to see.
A culdocentesis may also help confirm a diagnosis. In this procedure a needle is inserted into the space
at the top of the vagina, behind the uterus and in front
of the rectum. Blood in this area may indicate bleeding
from a ruptured fallopian tube.
A laparoscopy will enable the doctor to see the
patient’s reproductive organs and examine an ectopic
pregnancy. In this technique, a hollow tube with a
light on one end is inserted through a small incision
in the abdomen. Through this instrument the internal
organs can be observed.
Treatment
Ectopic pregnancy requires immediate treatment.
The earlier the condition is treated, the better the
chance to preserve the fallopian tube intact for future
normal pregnancies.Medical
If the ectopic pregnancy is discovered in a very early
stage of development, the drug methotrexate may be
given. The best results are obtained when the pregnancy
is less than six weeks old and the tubal mass is no more
than 1.4 in (3.5 cm) in diameter. Methotrexate, which
has been used successfully since 1987, works by inhibiting the growth of rapidly growing cells. (It is also used to
treat some cancers.) Most side effects are mild and
temporary, but the patient must be monitored after
treatment. Usually the medication is injected into the
muscle in a single dose, but may also be given intravenously or injected directly into the fallopian tube to
dissolve the embryonic tissue. Methotrexate has also
been used to treat ovarian, abdominal, and cervical
pregnancies that are discovered in the early stages.
Surgical
When a laparoscopy is done to visualize the ectopic pregnancy, the scope can be fitted with surgical
tools and used to remove the ectopic mass immediately
after it is identified. The affected fallopian tube can be
repaired or removed as necessary. This procedure can
be done without requiring the patient to stay in the
hospital overnight.
When the pregnancy has ruptured, a surgical
incision into the abdomen, or laparotomy, is
performed to stop the immediate loss of blood and
to remove the embryo. This usually requires general
anesthesia and a hospital stay. Every effort is made to
preserve and repair the injured fallopian tube.
However, if the fallopian tube has already ruptured,
repair is extremely difficult and the tube is usually
removed.
Alternative treatment
Ectopic pregnancy was first described in the eleventh century and was a potentially fatal condition
until the advent of surgery and blood transfusions in
the early twentieth century. The sophisticated diagnostic tools and surgical procedures developed since
the 1970s have equipped modern medicine with the
tools to not only save a woman’s life, but also to
preserve her future fertility.
Although there are herbal remedies for the temporary relief of the common symptoms of anxiety and
abdominal discomfort, prompt medical treatment is
the only sure remedy for ectopic pregnancy.Prognosis
Ectopic pregnancies are the leading cause of
pregnancy-related deaths in the first trimester and
account for 9% of all pregnancy-related deaths in
the United States. More than 1% of pregnancies are
ectopic, and they are becoming more common. The
reason for this increase is not clearly understood,
though it is thought that the dramatic increase in
sexually transmitted diseases (STD) is at least partly
responsible.
The earlier an ectopic pregnancy is diagnosed
and treated, the better the outcome. The chances of
having a successful pregnancy are lower after an
ectopic pregnancy, but depend on the extent of
permanent fallopian tube damage. If the tube has
been spared, chances are as high as 60%. The chances
of a successful pregnancy after the removal of one
tube are 40%.
Prevention
Many forms of ectopic pregnancy cannot be
prevented. However, tubal pregnancies, which make
up the majority of ectopic pregnancies, may be prevented by avoiding conditions that cause damage to
the fallopian tubes. Since half of all women who
experience ectopic pregnancy have a history of PID,
avoiding this infection or getting early diagnosis and
treatment for sexually transmitted diseases will
decrease the risk of a future problem.