Definition
Edwards’ syndrome is caused by an extra copy of
chromosome 18. For this reason, it is also called
trisomy 18 syndrome. The extra chromosome is lethal
for most babies born with this condition. It causes
major physical abnormalities and severe mental
retardation, and very few children afflicted with this
disease survive beyond a year.
Description
Humans normally have 23 pairs of chromosomes.
Chromosomes are numbered 1–22, and the 23rd pair is
composed of the sex chromosomes, X and Y. A person
inherits one set of 23 chromosomes from each parent.
Occasionally, a genetic error occurs during egg or
sperm cell formation. A child conceived with such an
egg or sperm cell may inherit an incorrect number of
chromosomes.
In the case of Edwards’ syndrome, the child inherits three, rather than two, copies of chromosome 18.
Trisomy 18 occurs in approximately one in every 3,000
newborns and affects girls more often than boys.
Women older than their early thirties have a greater
risk of conceiving a child with trisomy 18, but it can
occur in younger women.
Causes and symptoms
A third copy of chromosome 18 causes numerous
abnormalities. Most children born with Edwards’ syndrome appear weak and fragile, and they are often
underweight. The head is unusually small and the
back of the head is prominent. The ears are malformed
and low-set, and the mouth and jaw are small. The
baby may also have a cleft lip or cleft palate.
Frequently, the hands are clenched into fists, and the
index finger overlaps the other fingers. The child may
have clubfeet and toes may be webbed or fused.
Numerous problems involving the internal organs
may be present. Abnormalities often occur in the lungs
and diaphragm (the muscle that controls breathing),
and heart defects and blood vessel malformations are
common. The child may also have malformed kidneys
and abnormalities of the urogenital system.
Diagnosis
Physical abnormalities point to Edwards’ syndrome, but definitive diagnosis relies on karyotyping.
Karyotyping involves drawing the baby’s blood or
bone marrow for a microscopic examination of the
chromosomes. Using special stains and microscopy,
individual chromosomes are identified, and the
presence of an extra chromosome 18 is revealed.
Trisomy 18 can be detected before birth. If a
pregnant woman is older than 35, has a family history
of genetic abnormalities, has previously conceived a
child with a genetic abnormality, or has suffered
earlier miscarriages, she may undergo tests to determine whether her child carries genetic abnormalities.
Potential tests include maternal serum analysis or
screening, ultrasonography, amniocentesis, and
chorionic villus sampling.
Treatment
There is no cure for Edwards’ syndrome. Since
trisomy 18 babies frequently have major physical
abnormalities, doctors and parents face difficult
choices regarding treatment. Abnormalities can be
treated to a certain degree with surgery, but extreme
invasive procedures may not be in the best interests of
an infant whose lifespan is measured in days or weeks.
Medical therapy often consists of supportive care with
the goal of making the infant comfortable, rather than
prolonging life.
Prognosis
Most children born with trisomy 18 die within
their first year of life. The average lifespan is less than
two months for 50% of the children, and 90–95% die
before their first birthday. The 5–10% of children who
survive their first year are severely mentally retarded.
They need support to walk, and learning is limited.
Verbal communication is also limited, but they can
learn to recognize and interact with others.
Prevention
Edwards’ syndrome cannot be prevented.