Definition
Elder abuse is a general term used to describe
harmful acts toward an elderly adult, such as physical
abuse, sexual abuse, emotional or psychological
abuse, financial exploitation, and neglect, including
self-neglect.
Description
Results from the National Elder Abuse Incidence
Study, funded in part by the Administration on Aging,
suggest that over 500,000 people 60 years of age and
older are abused or neglected each year in the United
States. It was also found that four times as many
incidents of abuse, neglect, or self-neglect are never
reported, causing researchers to estimate that as
many as two million elderly persons in the United
States are abused each year. In 90% of the cases, the
abusers were found to be family members and most
often were the adult children or spouses of those
abused. In addition, equal numbers of men and
women have been identified as the abusers. However,
women, especially those over 80 years of age, tend to
be victimized more than men.
Elder abuse can take place anywhere, but the two
main settings addressed by law are domestic settings,
such as the elder’s home or the caregiver’s home, and
institutional settings, such as a nursing home or
group home. In general, there are five basic types of
elderly abuse: physical, sexual, emotional or psychological, financial, and neglect. Data from National
Center on Elder Abuse indicates that more than half
of the cases reported involve some kind of neglect,
whereas 1 in 7 cases involve physical abuse. It is
considered neglect when a caretaker deprives an
elderly person of the necessary care needed in order
to avoid physical or mental harm. Sometimes the
behavior of an elderly person threatens his or her
own health; in those cases, the abuse is called selfneglect. Physical abuse refers to physical force that
causes bodily harm to an elderly person, such as
slapping, pushing, kicking, pinching, or burning.
About 1 in 8 cases of elderly abuse involve some
form of financial exploitation, which is defined as the
use of an elderly person’s resources without his or her
consent. The National Center on Elder Abuse defines
emotional and psychological abuse of a senior as
causing anguish, pain, or distress through verbal or
nonverbal acts, such as verbal assaults, insults, intimidation, and humiliation, for example. Isolating elderly
persons from their friends and family as well as
giving them the silent treatment are two other forms
of emotional and psychological abuse. Any kind of
non-consensual sexual contact with an elderly person
that takes place without his or her consent is considered sexual abuse.
Causes and symptoms
Elder abuse is a complex problem that can be
caused by many factors. According to the National
Center on Elder Abuse, social isolation and mental
impairment are two factors of elder abuse. Studies
show that people advanced in years, such as in their
eighties, with a high level of frailty and dependency
are more likely to be victims of elder abuse than people
who are younger and better equipped to stand up
for themselves. Because spouses make up a large
percentage of elder abusers, at least 40% statistically,
some research has been done in the area, which shows
that a pattern of domestic violence is associated with
many of the cases. The risk of elder abuse appears
to be especially high when adult children live with
their elderly parents for financial reasons or because
they have personal problems, such as drug dependency or mental illness. Some experts have speculated
that elderly people living in rural areas with their
caretakers may have a higher risk of being abused
than city dwellers. The idea behind this theory is
that the opportunity exists for the abuse to occur,
but there is less likelihood that the abuser will be
caught. More research in this very important area is
needed in order to illuminate the relationship
between these factors.
The National Center on Elder Abuse identifies the
following as signs of elder abuse:
 Bruises, pressure marks, broken bones, abrasions,
and burns may indicate physical abuse or neglect.
 Unexplained withdrawal from normal activities and
unusual depression may be indicators of emotional
abuse.
 Bruises around the breasts or genital area, as well as
unexplained bleeding around the genital area, may
be signs of sexual abuse.
 Large withdrawals of money from an elder’s bank
account, sudden changes in a will, and the sudden
disappearance of valuable items may be indications
of financial exploitation.
 Bedsores, poor hygiene, unsanitary living conditions, and unattended medical needs may be signs
of neglect.Failure to take necessary medicines, leaving a
burning stove unattended, poor hygiene, confusion,
unexplained weight loss, and dehydration may all be
signs of self-neglect.
Diagnosis and Treatment
The National Committee for the Prevention of
Elder Abuse notes that Adult Protective Services
(APS) caseworkers are often on the front lines when
it comes to elderly abuse. People being abused or those
who believe abuse is taking place can turn to their local
APS office for help. The APS routinely screens calls,
keeps all information confidential, and, if necessary,
sends a caseworker out to conduct an investigation.
In the event that a crisis intervention is needed, the
APS caseworker can arrange for any necessary emergency treatment. If it is unclear whether elder abuse
has taken place, the APS caseworker can serve as a
liaison between the elderly person and other community agencies.
According to the National Committee for the
Prevention of Elder Abuse, ‘‘professionals in the field
of aging are often the first to discover signs of elder
abuse.’’ Providing encouragement and advice, they
play a critical role in educating others with regard
to the needs of the elderly. They not only provide
valuable support to the victims of abuse, but they
also monitor high-risk situations and gather important information that can help validate that abuse has
taken place.
Some people might think that a person who
has cognitive impairment might be unable to describe
mistreatment; however, that is not the case. In fact,
guidelines set by the American Medical Association
call for ‘routine questions about abuse and neglect
even among patients with cognitive impairment
in order to improve the identification of cases and
implement appropriate treatment and referral.’
Rather than an inability to describe mistreatment,
what might stop an elderly person from reporting
abuse is a sense of embarrassment or fear of retaliation. To complicate matters, differences exist among
cultural groups regarding what defines abuse.
Therefore, most states have established laws that
define elder abuse and require health care providers to
report any cases they encounter with penalties
attached for failing to do so. Indeed, statistics show
that health care providers, for example, report almost
25% of the known cases of elder abuse. Therefore,
physicians play a very important role in identifying
and treating elders who have been abused. And yet, in
an article published by the Journal of the American
Geriatrics Society, Dr. Conlin pointed out that only
1 of every 13 cases of elder abuse are reported by
physicians. There may be several reasons for this. In
some cases, the problem may simply go unnoticed,
especially if the physician has no obvious reason to
suspect any wrongdoing. In other cases, the patient
may hide or deny the problem.
In recent years, much media attention has been
focused on elderly abuse that takes place in institutional settings. Anyone who believes that a loved one
is being abused while in a nursing home or other
institutional setting should contact the authorities for
assistance immediately.
Prognosis
The mortality rate of an elderly person who has
been mistreated is higher than the mortality rate
of an elderly person who has not experienced abuse.
Nonetheless, numerous success stories exist regarding successful interventions. Social workers and
health care professionals, as well as concerned citizens from a variety of backgrounds, have played a
key role in identifying and obtaining treatment for
abused elders.
Prevention
Planning for the future is one of the best ways to
avoid elder abuse. Consider a variety of retirement
options, ones that will encourage safety as well as
independence. It is important to stay active in the
community. Avoiding isolation minimizes the likelihood that abuse will occur. Seek professional
counsel when necessary; it is important for everyone
to know their rights and to be advocates on their
own behalf.