Definition
An electrophysiology (EP) study of the heart is a
nonsurgical analysis of the electrical conduction
system (normal or abnormal) of the heart. The test
employs cardiac catheters and sophisticated computers to generate electrocardiogram (EKG) tracings
and electrical measurements with exquisite precision
from within the heart chambers.
The EP study can be performed solely for diagnostic purposes. It also is performed to pinpoint the
exact location of electrical signals (cardiac mapping)
in conjunction with a therapeutic procedure called
catheter ablation.
The test is simple, not painful, and performed in a
special laboratory under controlled clinical circumstances by cardiologists and nurses who subspecialize
in electrophysiology.
Purpose
A cardiologist may recommend an EP study when
the standard EKG, Holter monitor, event recorder,
stress test, echocardiogram, or angiogram cannot provide enough information to evaluate an abnormal
heart rhythm, called an arrhythmia.
An EP study also may be beneficial in diagnosing
a suspected arrhythmia in a patient who shows symptoms of an arrhythmia but in whom it could not be
detected from other tests.
The purpose and great value of an EP study is
that it offers more detailed information to the doctor
about the electrical activity in the heart than the
aforementioned noninvasive tests because electrodes
are placed directly on heart tissue. This allows the
electrophysiologist to determine the specific location
of an arrhythmia and, oftentimes, correct it
during the same procedure. This corrective treatment is permanent and considered a cure, and, in
many cases, the patient may not need to take heart
medications.
EP studies may be helpful in assessing:
 certain tachycardias or bradycardias of unknown
cause
 patients who have been resuscitated after experiencing sudden cardiac death
 various symptoms of unknown cause, such as chest
pain, shortness of breath, fatigue, or syncope (dizziness/fainting)
 response to anti-arrhythmic therapy
Precautions
Pregnant patients should not undergo an EP
study because of exposure to radiation during the
study, which may be harmful to the growing baby.
Patients who have coronary artery disease may
need to have that treated before having an EP study.
Description
The rhythmic pumping action of the heart, which
is essentially a muscle, is the result of electrical
impulses traveling throughout the walls of the four
heart chambers. These impulses originate in the
sinoatrial (SA) node, which are specialized cells
situated in the top right chamber of the heart: the
right atrium. Normally, the SA node, acting like a
spark plug, spontaneously generates the impulses,
which travel through specific pathways throughout
the atria to the atrioventricular (AV) node. The AV
node is a relay station, sending the impulses to more
specialized muscle fibers throughout the bottom
chambers of the heart: the ventricles. If these pathways become damaged or blocked or if extra (abnormal) pathways exist, the heart’s rhythm may be
altered (perhaps too slow, too fast, or irregular),
which can seriously affect the heart’s pumping
ability.
The patient is transported to the x-ray table in the
EP lab and connected to various monitors. Sterile
sheets are placed over him or her. A minimum of two
catheters are inserted into the right femoral (thigh)
vein in the groin area. Depending on the type of
arrhythmia, the number of catheters used in an EP
test and their route to the heart may vary. For certain
tachycardias, two more catheters may be inserted in
the left groin and one in the internal jugular (neck)
vein or in the subclavian (below the clavicle) vein. The
catheters are about 0.08 in (2 mm) in diameter, about
the size of a spaghetti noodle. The catheters used in
catheter ablation are slightly larger.
With the help of fluoroscopy (x rays on a television screen), all the catheters are guided to several
specific locations in the heart. Typically, four to 10
electrodes are located on the end of the catheters,
which have the ability to send electrical signals to
stimulate the heart (called pacing) and to receive electrical signals from the heart–but not at the same time
(just as a walkie-talkie cannot send and receive messages at the same time).
First, the electrodes are positioned to receive signals from inside the heart chambers. This allows the
doctor to measure how fast the electrical impulses
travel currently in the patient’s heart. These measurements are called the patient’s baseline measurements.
Next, the electrodes are positioned to pace: The EP
team actually tries to induce (sometimes in combination with various heart drugs) the arrhythmia that the
patient has previously experienced so the team can
observe it in a controlled environment, compare it to
the patient’s clinical or spontaneous arrhythmia, and
decide how to treat it.
Once the arrhythmia is induced and the team
determines it can be treated with catheter ablation,
cardiac mapping is performed to locate precisely the
origin and route of the abnormal pathway. When this is accomplished, the ablating electrode catheter is
positioned directly against the abnormal pathway,
and high radio-frequency energy is delivered through
the electrode to destroy (burn) the tissue in this area.
Preparation
The following preparations are made for an EP
study:
 the patient may be advised to stop taking certain
medications, especially heart drugs, that may interfere with the test results.
 blood tests usually are ordered the week before the test.
 the patient undergoes conscious sedation (awake but
relaxed) during the test. This is accomplished quite
often with the anesthetic drugs VersedR (Roche
laboratories) and fentanyl.
 a local anesthetic is injected at the site of catheter
insertion.
Aftercare
The patient needs to rest flat in bed for several
hours after the procedure to allow healing at the catheter insertion sites.
The patient often returns home either the same
day of the test or the next day. Someone should drive
him or her home.
The doctor may prescribe drugs and/or insert an
AFCD to treat the arrhythmia and may do a possible
follow-up EP study.
Risks
The EP diagnostic study and catheter ablation
are low-risk procedures. There is a small risk of
bleeding and/or infection at the site of catheter insertion, but this occurs less than 1% of the time. Blood
clot formation occurs only two in 1,000 instances
and is minimized with blood thinner medications
administered during the procedure. Vascular injuries
causing hemorrhage or thrombophlebitis are
possible but occur less than 0.7% of the time.
Cardiac perforations occur only in one or two per
1,000 instances. If the right internal jugular vein is
accessed, the small possibility of puncturing the lung
with the catheter exists, which, at worst, could cause
a collapsed lung.
Because ventricular tachycardia or fibrillation
(lethal arrhythmias) may be induced in the patient,
the EP lab personnel must be prepared to defibrillate
the patient as necessary.
Normal results
The heart initiates and conducts electrical
impulses normally.
Abnormal results
Confirmation of arrhythmias, such as:
 supraventricular tachycardias
 ventricular arrhythmias
 accessory (extra) pathways
 bradycardias