Definition
Electrocardiography is a commonly used, noninvasive procedure for recording electrical changes
in the heart. The record, which is called an electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG), shows the series of
waves that relate to the electrical impulses which
occur during each beat of the heart. The results are
printed on paper or displayed on a monitor. The
waves in a normal record are named P, Q, R, S,
and T and follow in alphabetical order. The number of waves may vary, and other waves may be
present.
Purpose
Electrocardiography is a starting point for detecting many cardiac problems. It is used routinely in
physical examinations and for monitoring the
patient’s condition during and after surgery, as well
as during intensive care. It is the basic measurement
used for tests such as exercise tolerance. It is used to
evaluate causes of symptoms such as chest pain, shortness of breath, and palpitations.
Precautions
No special precautions are required.
Description
The patient disrobes from the waist up, and electrodes (tiny wires in adhesive pads) are applied to
specific sites on the arms, legs, and chest. When
attached, the electrodes are called leads; three to 12
leads may be employed.
Muscle movement may interfere with the recording, which lasts for several beats of the heart. In
cases where rhythm disturbances are suspected to
be infrequent, the patient may wear a small Holter
monitor in order to record continuously over a
24-hour period; this is known as ambulatory
monitoring.
Preparation
The skin is cleaned to obtain good electrical contact at the electrode positions.
Aftercare
To avoid skin irritation from the salty gel used to
obtain good electrical contact, the skin should be
thoroughly cleaned after removal of the electrodes.
Risks
No complications from this procedure have been
observed.
Normal results
When the heart is operating normally, each part
contracts in a specific order. Contraction of the
muscle is triggered by an electrical impulse. These
electrical impulses travel through specialized cells
that form a conduction system. Following this
pathway ensures that contractions will occur in a
coordinated manner.
When the presence of all waves is observed in the
electrocardiogram and these waves follow the order
defined alphabetically, the heart is said to show a
normal sinus rhythm, and impulses may be assumed
to be following the regular conduction pathway.
The heart is described as showing arrhythmia or
dysrhythmia when time intervals between waves, the
order, or the number of waves do not fit this pattern.
Other features that may be altered include the direction of wave deflection and wave widths.
In the normal heart, electrical impulses–at a rate
of 60–100 times per minute–originate in the sinus
node. The sinus node is located in the first chamber,
known as the right atrium, where blood re-enters the
heart. After traveling down to the junction between
the upper and lower chambers, the signal stimulates
the atrioventricular node. From here, after a delay,
it passes by specialized routes through the lower
chambers or ventricles. In many disease states, the
passage of the electrical impulse can be interrupted
in a variety of ways, causing the heart to perform less
efficiently.
Abnormal results
Special training is required for interpretation of
the electrocardiogram. To summarize the features
used in interpretations in the simplest manner, the
P wave of the electrocardiogram is associated with
the contraction of the atria. The QRS series of waves,
or QRS complex, is associated with ventricular
contraction, with the T wave coming after the contraction. Finally, the P-Q or P-R interval gives a
value for the time taken for the electrical impulse to
travel from the atria to the ventricle (normally less
than 0.2 sec).
The cause of dysrhythmia is ectopic beats.
Ectopic beats are premature heart beats that arise
from a site other than the sinus node–commonly
from the atria, atrioventricular node, or the ventricle. When these dysrhythmias are only occasional,
they may produce no symptoms, or a feeling of the
heart turning over or ‘‘flip-flopping’’ may be experienced. These occasional dysrhythmias are common
in healthy people, but they also can be an indication
of heart disease.
The varied sources of dysrhythmias provide a
wide range of alterations in the form of the electrocardiogram. Ectopic beats that start in the ventricle
display an abnormal QRS complex. This can indicate
disease associated with insufficient blood supply to
the muscle (myocardial ischemia). Multiple ectopic
sites lead to rapid and uncoordinated contractions of
the atria or ventricles. This condition is known as
fibrillation. In atrial fibrillation, P waves are absent,
and the QRS complex appears at erratic intervals, or
‘‘irregularly irregular.’’
When the atrial impulse fails to reach the ventricle, a condition known as heart block results. If this is
partial, the P-R interval (the time for the impulse to reach the ventricle) is prolonged. If complete, the
ventricles beat independently of the atria at about 40
beats per minute, and the QRS complex is mostly
dissociated from the P wave.