Definition
Electrical nerve stimulation, also called transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS), is a
noninvasive, drug-free pain management technique. By
sending electrical signals to underlying nerves, the
battery-powered TENS device can relieve a wide
range of chronic and acute pain.
Purpose
TENS is used to relieve pain caused by a variety of
chronic conditions, including:
 neck and lower back pain
 headache/migraine
 arthritis
 post-herpetic neuralgia (lingering chronic pain after
an attack of shingles)
 sciatica (pain radiating from lower back, through the
legs, to the foot)
 temporomandibular joint pain
 osteoarthritis
 amputation (phantom limb)
 fibromyalgia (a condition causing aching and stiffness throughout the body)
The device is also effective against short-term
pain, such as:
 shingles (painful skin eruptions along the nerves)
 bursitis (inflammation of tissue surrounding a
joint)
 childbirth
 post-surgical pain
 fractures
 muscle and joint pain
 sports injuries
 menstrual cramps
Precautions
Because TENS may interfere with pacemaker
function, patients with pacemakers should consult a
cardiologist before using a TENS unit. Patients should
also avoid electrical stimulation in the front of the
neck, which can be hazardous. The safety of the device
during pregnancy has not been established.
TENS doesn’t cure any condition; it simply
eases pain. Patients who are not sure what is causing their pain should consult a physician before
using TENS.
Description
The TENS device is a small battery-powered stimulator that produces low-intensity electrical signals
through electrodes on or near a painful area, producing a tingling sensation that reduces pain. There is no
dosage limitation, and the patient controls the amount
of pain relief.
Some experts believe TENS works by blocking
pain signals in the spinal cord, or by delivering electrical impulses to underlying nerve fibers that lessen
the experience of pain. Others suspect that the electrical stimulation triggers the release of natural painkillers in the body.
Patients can rent a TENS unit before buying one,
to see if it is effective against their pain.
Preparation
After TENS has been prescribed, a doctor will
refer the patient to a TENS specialist, who will explain
how to use the machine. The specialist works with the
patient to determine the settings and electrode placements for the best pain relief.
Risks
TENS is nonaddictive and completely safe. The
only side effect may be a slight skin irritation or redness in some people, which can be prevented by using
different gels or electrodes.
 Normal results
The amount of relief a person gets using TENS
depends on the underlying cause of the pain, a person’s mental state, and whether or not medication is
also used. At least one study found that both a real
TENS machine and a placebo were equally effective in
reducing pain. This suggests that at least part of its
effectiveness may be due to the patient’s belief in its
ability to ease pain.