Definition
An electrolyte disorder is an imbalance of certain
ionized salts (i.e., bicarbonate, calcium, chloride, magnesium, phosphate, potassium, and sodium) in the
blood.
Description
Electrolytes are ionized molecules found throughout the blood, tissues, and cells of the body. These
molecules, which are either positive (cations) or negative (anions), conduct an electric current and help to
balance pH and acid-base levels in the body.
Electrolytes also facilitate the passage of fluid between
and within cells through a process known as osmosis
and play a part in regulating the function of the neuromuscular, endocrine, and excretory systems.
The serum electrolytes include:
 Sodium (Na). A positively charged electrolyte that
helps to balance fluid levels in the body and facilitates neuromuscular functioning.
 Potassium (K). A main component of cellular fluid,
this positive electrolyte helps to regulate neuromuscular function and osmotic pressure.
 Calcium (Ca). A cation, or positive electrolyte, that
affects neuromuscular performance and contributes
to skeletal growth and blood coagulation.
 Magnesium (Mg). Influences muscle contractions
and intracellular activity. A cation.
 Chloride (CI). An anion, or negative electrolyte, that
regulates blood pressure.
 Phosphate (HPO4). Negative electrolyte that
impacts metabolism and regulates acid-base balance
and calcium levels.
 Bicarbonate (HCO3). A negatively charged electrolyte that assists in the regulation of blood pH levels.
Bicarbonate insufficiencies and elevations cause
acid-base disorders (i.e., acidosis, alkalosis).
Medications, chronic diseases, and trauma (for
example, burns, or fractures etc.) may cause the concentration of certain electrolytes in the body to become
too high (hyper-) or too low (hypo-). When this happens, an electrolyte imbalance, or disorder, results.
Causes and symptoms
Sodium HYPERNATREMIA. Sodium helps the kidneys to
regulate the amount of water the body retains or
excretes. Consequently, individuals with elevated
serum sodium levels also suffer from a loss of fluids,
or dehydration. Hypernatremia can be caused by
inadequate water intake, excessive fluid loss (i.e.,
diabetes insipidus, kidney disease, severe burns, and
prolonged vomiting or diarrhea), or sodium retention
(caused by excessive sodium intake or aldosteronism).
In addition, certain drugs, including loop diuretics,
corticosteroids, and antihypertensive medications
may cause elevated sodium levels.
Symptoms of hypernatremia include:
 thirst
 orthostatic hypotension
 dry mouth and mucous membranes
 dark, concentrated urine
 loss of elasticity in the skin
 irregular heartbeat (tachycardia)
 irritability
 fatigue
 lethargy
 heavy, labored breathing
 muscle twitching and/or seizures
 HYPONATREMIA. Up to 1% of all hospitalized
patients and as many as 18% of nursing home patients
develop hyponatremia, making it one of the most
common electrolyte disorders. A 2004 study questioned the routine make-up of fluids prescribed for
children and delivered intravenously (through a
needle into a vein) in hospitals today. The authors
recommended only using IV fluids when necessary
and then using isotonic saline. Diuretics, certain
psychoactive drugs (i.e., fluoxetine, sertraline, haloperidol), specific antipsychotics (lithium), vasopressin,
chlorpropamide, the illicit drug ‘‘ecstasy,’’ and other
pharmaceuticals can cause decreased sodium levels,
or hyponatremia. Low sodium levels may also be
triggered by inadequate dietary intake of sodium,
excessive perspiration, water intoxication, and impairment of adrenal gland or kidney function.
Symptoms of hyponatremia include:
 nausea, abdominal cramping, and/or vomiting
 headache
 edema (swelling)
 muscle weakness and/or tremor
 paralysis
 disorientation
 slowed breathing
 seizures
 coma
Potassium
 HYPERKALEMIA. Hyperkalemia may be caused by
ketoacidosis (diabetic coma), myocardial infarction
(heart attack), severe burns, kidney failure, fasting,
bulimia nervosa, gastrointestinal bleeding, adrenal
insufficiency, or Addison’s disease. Diuretic drugs,
cyclosporin, lithium, heparin, ACE inhibitors, beta
blockers, and trimethoprim can increase serum
potassium levels, as can heavy exercise. The condition
may also be secondary to hypernatremia (low serum
concentrations of sodium). Symptoms may include:
 weakness
 nausea and/or abdominal pain
 irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia)
 diarrhea
 muscle pain
 HYPOKALEMIA. Severe dehydration, aldosteronism,
Cushing’s syndrome, kidney disease, long-term diuretic
therapy, certain penicillins, laxative abuse, congestive
heart failure, and adrenal gland impairments can all
cause depletion of potassium levels in the bloodstream.
A substance known as glycyrrhetinic acid, whichis found
in licorice and chewing tobacco, can also deplete potassium serum levels. Symptoms of hypokalemia include:
 weakness
 paralysis
 increased urination
 irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia)
 orthostatic hypotension
 muscle pain
 tetany
Calcium
 HYPERCALCEMIA. Blood calcium levels may be elevated in cases of thyroid disorder, multiple myeloma,
metastatic cancer, multiple bone fractures, milk-alkali
syndrome, and Paget’s disease. Excessive use of
calcium-containing supplements and certain overthe-counter medications (i.e., antacids) may also cause
hypercalcemia. In infants, lesser known causes may
include blue diaper syndrome, Williams syndrome,
secondary hyperparathyroidism from maternal hypocalcemia, and dietary phosphate deficiency. Symptoms
include:
 fatigue
 constipation
 depression
 confusion
 muscle pain
 nausea and vomiting
 dehydration
 increased urination
 irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia)
 HYPOCALCEMIA. Thyroid disorders, kidney failure, severe burns, sepsis, vitamin D deficiency, and
medications such as heparin and glucogan can deplete
blood calcium levels. Lowered levels cause:
 muscle cramps and spasms
 tetany and/or convulsions
 mood changes (depression, irritability)
 dry skin
 brittle nails
 facial twitching
Magnesium
 HYPERMAGNESEMIA. Excessive magnesium levels
may occur with end-stage renal disease, Addison’s
disease, or an overdose of magnesium salts.
Hypermagnesemia is characterized by:
 lethargy
 hypotension
 decreased heart and respiratory rate
 muscle weakness
 diminished tendon reflexes
 HYPOMAGNESEMIA. Inadequate dietary intake of
magnesium, often caused by chronic alcoholism or
malnutrition, is a common cause of hypomagnesemia.
Other causes include malabsorption syndromes, pancreatitis, aldosteronism, burns, hyperparathyroidism,
digestive system disorders, and diuretic use.
Symptoms of low serum magnesium levels include:
 leg and foot cramps
 weight loss
 vomiting
 muscle spasms, twitching, and tremors
 seizures
 muscle weakness
 arrthymia
Chloride
 HYPERCHLOREMIA. Severe dehydration, kidney
failure, hemodialysis, traumatic brain injury, and
aldosteronism can also cause hyperchloremia. Drugs
such as boric acid and ammonium chloride and the
intravenous (IV) infusion of sodium chloride can also
boost chloride levels, resulting in hyperchloremic
metabolic acidosis. Symptoms include:
 weakness
 headache
 nausea
 cardiac arrest
 HYPOCHLOREMIA. Hypochloremia usually occurs
as a result of sodium and potassium depletion (i.e.,
hyponatremia, hypokalemia). Severe depletion of serum chloride levels causes metabolic alkalosis. This
alkalization of the bloodstream is characterized by:
 mental confusion
 slowed breathing
 paralysis
 muscle tension or spasm
Phosphate
HYPERPHOSPHATEMIA. Skeletal fractures or disease, kidney failure, hypoparathyroidism, hemodialysis,
diabetic ketoacidosis, acromegaly, systemic infection,
and intestinal obstruction can all cause phosphate
retention and build-up in the blood. The disorder
occurs concurrently with hypocalcemia. Individuals
with mild hyperphosphatemia are typically asymptomatic, but signs of severe hyperphosphatemia include:
 tingling in hands and fingers
 muscle spasms and cramps
 convulsions
 cardiac arrest
HYPOPHOSPHATEMIA. Serum phosphate levels of
2 mg/dL or below may be caused by hypomagnesemia
and hypokalemia. Severe burns, alcoholism, diabetic
ketoacidosis, kidney disease, hyperparathyroidism, hypothyroidism, Cushing’s syndrome, malnutrition, hemodialysis, vitaminD deficiency, and prolonged diuretic therapy
can also diminish blood phosphate levels. There are
typically few physical signs of mild phosphate depletion.
Symptoms of severe hypophosphatemia include:
 muscle weakness
 weight loss
 bone deformities (osteomalacia)
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is performed by a physician or other qualified healthcare provider who will take a medical history,
discuss symptoms, perform acomplete physical examination, and prescribe appropriate laboratory tests. Because
electrolyte disorders commonly affect the neuromuscular
system, the provider will test reflexes. If a calcium imbalance is suspected, the physician will also check for
Chvostek’s sign, a reflex test that triggers an involuntary
facial twitch, and Trousseau’s sign, a muscle spasm that
occurs in response to pressure on the upper arm.
Serum electrolyte imbalances can be detected
through blood tests. Blood is drawn from a vein on
the back of the hand or inside of the elbow by a medical
technician, or phlebotomist, and analyzed at a lab.
Normal levels of electrolytes are:
 Sodium. 135–145 mEq/L (serum)
 Potassium. 3.5–5.5 mEq/L (serum)
 Calcium. 8.8–10.4 mg/dL (total Ca; serum);
4.7–5.2 mg/dL (unbound Ca; serum)
 Magnesium. 1.4–2.1 mEq/L (plasma)
 Chloride. 100–108 mEq/L (serum)
 Phosphate. 2.5–4.5 mg/dL (plasma; adults)
Standard ranges for test results may vary due to
differing laboratory standards and physiological variances (gender, age, and other factors). Other blood
tests that determine pH levels and acid-base balance
may also be performed.
Treatment
Treatment of electrolyte disorders depends on the
underlying cause of the problem and the type of electrolyte involved. If the disorder is caused by poor diet
or improper fluid intake, nutritional changes may be
prescribed. If medications such as diuretics triggered
the imbalance, discontinuing or adjusting the drug
therapy may effectively treat the condition. Fluid
and electrolyte replacement therapy, either intravenously or by mouth, can reverse electrolyte depletion.
Hemodialysis treatment may be required to
reduce serum potassium levels in hyperkalemic
patients with impaired kidney function. It may also
be recommended for renal patients suffering from
severe hypermagnesemia.
Prognosis
A patient’s long-term prognosis depends upon the
root cause of the electrolyte disorder. However, when
treated quickly and appropriately, electrolyte imbalances in and of themselves are usually effectively
reversed.
When they are mild, some electrolyte imbalances
have few to no symptoms and may pass unnoticed.
For example, transient hyperphosphatemia is usually
fairly benign. However, long-term elevations of blood
phosphate levels can lead to potentially fatal soft tissue and vascular calcifications and bone disease, and
severe serum phosphate deficiencies (hypophosphatemia) can cause encephalopathy, coma, and death.
Severe hypernatremia has a mortality rate of
40–60%. Death is commonly due to cerebrovascular
damage and hemorrhage resulting from dehydration
and shrinkage of the brain cells.Prevention
Physicians should use caution when prescribing
drugs known to affect electrolyte levels and acid-base
balance. Individuals with kidney disease, thyroid problems, and other conditions that may place them at
risk for developing an electrolyte disorder should be
educated on the signs and symptoms.