Definition
Electroencephalography, or EEG, is a neurological test that uses an electronic monitoring device to
measure and record electrical activity in the brain.
Purpose
The EEG is a key tool in the diagnosis and
management of epilepsy and other seizure disorders.
It is also used to assist in the diagnosis of brain damage
and disease (e.g., stroke, tumors, encephalitis), mental
retardation, sleep disorders, degenerative diseases
such as Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease,
and certain mental disorders (e.g., alcoholism, schizophrenia, autism).
An EEG may also be used to monitor brain
activity during surgery and to determine brain death.
Precautions
Electroencephalography should be administered
and interpreted by a trained medical professional
only. Data from an EEG is only one element of a
complete medical and/or psychological patient assessment, and should never be used alone as the sole basis
for a diagnosis.
Description
Before the EEG begins, a nurse or technician
attaches approximately 16–20 electrodes to the
patient’s scalp with a conductive, washable paste.
Depending on the purpose for the EEG, implantable
or invasive electrodes are occasionally used.
Implantable electrodes include sphenoidal electrodes,
which are fine wires inserted under the zygomatic
arch, or cheekbone; and depth electrodes, which
are surgically-implanted into the brain. The EEG
electrodes are painless, and are used to measure the
electrical activity in various regions of the brain.
For the test, the patient lies on a bed, padded table,
or comfortable chair and is asked to relax and remain
still during the EEG testing period. An EEG usually
takes no more than one hour. During the test procedure,
the patient may be asked to breathe slowly or quickly;
visual stimuli such as flashing lights or a patterned
board may be used to stimulate certain types of brain
activity. Throughout the procedure, the electroencephalograph machine makes a continuous graphic record of
the patient’s brain activity, or brainwaves, on a long
strip of recording paper or on a computer screen. This
graphic record is called an electroencephalogram.
The sleep EEG uses the same equipment and
procedures as a regular EEG. Patients undergoing a
sleep EEG are encouraged to fall asleep completely
rather than just relax. They are typically provided a
bed and a quiet room conducive to sleep. A sleep
EEG lasts up to three hours.
In an ambulatory EEG, patients are hooked up to
a portable cassette recorder. They then go about their
normal activities, and take their normal rest and sleep
for a period of up to 24 hours. During this period, the
patient and patient’s family record any symptoms or
abnormal behaviors, which can later be correlated
with the EEG to see if they represent seizures.
Many insurance plans provide reimbursement for
EEG testing. Costs for an EEG range from $100 to
more than $500, depending on the purpose and type of
test (i.e., asleep or awake, and invasive or non-invasive
electrodes). Because coverage may be dependent on
the disorder or illness the EEG is evaluating, patients
should check with their individual insurance plan.
Preparation
Full instructions should be given to EEG patients
when they schedule their test. Typically, individuals on
medications that affect the central nervous system,
such as anticonvulsants, stimulants, or antidepressants, are told to discontinue their prescription for a
short time prior to the test (usually one to two days).
Patients may be asked to avoid food and beverages
that contain caffeine, a central nervous system
stimulant. However, any such request should be cleared by the treating physician. Patients may also be
asked to arrive for the test with clean hair free of spray
or other styling products.
Patients undergoing a sleep EEG may be asked to
remain awake the night before their test. They may be
given a sedative prior to the test to induce sleep.
Aftercare
If the patient has suspended regular medication
for the test, the EEG nurse or technician should advise
him when he can begin taking it again.
Risks
Being off medication for one–two days may
trigger seizures. Certain procedures used during EEG
may trigger seizures in patients with epilepsy. Those
procedures include flashing lights and deep breathing.
If the EEG is being used as a diagnostic for epilepsy
(i.e., to determine the type of seizures an individual is
suffering from), this may be a desired effect, although
the patient needs to be monitored closely so that the
seizure can be aborted if necessary. This type of test is
known as an ictal EEG.
Normal results
In reading and interpreting brainwave patterns, a
neurologist or other physician will evaluate the type of
brainwaves and the symmetry, location, and consistency of brainwave patterns. He will also look at the
brainwave response to certain stimuli presented
during the EEG test (such as flashing lights or noise).
There are four basic types of brainwaves: alpha, beta,
theta, and delta. ‘‘Normal’’ brainwave patterns vary
widely, depending on factors of age and activity. For
example, awake and relaxed individuals typically
register an alpha wave pattern of eight to 13 cycles
per second. Young children and sleeping adults may
have a delta wave pattern of under four cycles per
second.
Abnormal results
The EEG readings of patients with epilepsy or
other seizure disorders display bursts or spikes of
electrical activity. In focal epilepsy, spikes are
restricted to one hemisphere of the brain. If spikes
are generalized to both hemispheres of the brain,
multifocal epilepsy may be present.
The diagnostic brainwave patterns of other disorders varies widely. The appearance of excess theta
waves (four to eight cycles per second) may indicate
brain injury. Brain wave patterns in patients with
brain disease, mental retardation, and brain injury
show overall slowing. A trained medical specialist
should interpret EEG results in the context of the
patient’s medical history, and other pertinent medical
test results.