Definition
The word elephantiasis is a vivid and accurate
term for the syndrome it describes: the gross (visible)
enlargement of the arms, legs, or genitals to elephantoid size.
Description
True elephantiasis is the result of a parasitic infection caused by three specific kinds of round worms.
The long, threadlike worms block the body’s lymphatic system–a network of channels, lymph nodes, and
organs that helps maintain proper fluid levels in the
body by draining lymph from tissues into the bloodstream. This blockage causes fluids to collect in the
tissues, which can lead to great swelling, called
‘‘lymphedema.’’ Limbs can swell so enormously that
they resemble an elephant’s foreleg in size, texture, and
color. This is the severely disfiguring and disabling
condition of elephantiasis.
There are a few different causes of elephantiasis,
but the agents responsible for most of the elephantiasis in the world are filarial worms: white, slender
round worms found in most tropical and subtropical
places. They are transmitted by particular kinds (species) of mosquitoes, that is, bloodsucking insects.
Infection with these worms is called ‘‘lymphatic filariasis’’ and over a long period of time can cause
elephantiasis.
Lymphatic filariasis is a disease of underdeveloped regions found in South America, Central
Africa, Asia, the Pacific Islands, and the Caribbean.
It is a disease that has been present for centuries,
as ancient Persian and Indian writings clearly
described elephant-like swellings of the arms, legs,
and genitals. It is estimated that 120 million people
in the world have lymphatic filariasis. The disease
appears to be spreading, in spite of decades of research
in this area.
Other terms for elephantiasis are Barbados leg,
elephant leg, morbus herculeus, mal de Cayenne, and
myelolymphangioma.
Other situations that can lead to elephantiasis are:
 a protozoan disease called leishmaniasis
 a repeated streptococcal infection
 the surgical removal of lymph nodes (usually to prevent the spread of cancer)
 a hereditary birth defect
Causes and symptoms
Three kinds of round worms cause elephantiasis
filariasis: Wuchereria bancrofti, Brugia malayi, and
Brugia timori. Of these three, W. bancrofti makes up
about 90% of the cases. Man is the only known host of
W. bancrofti.
Culex, Aedes, and Anopheles mosquitoes are the
carriers of W. bancrofti. Anopheles and Mansonia mosquitoes are the carriers of B. malayi. In addition,
Anopheles mosquitoes are the carriers of B. timori.
Infected female mosquitoes take a blood meal
from a human, and in doing so, introduce larval
forms of the particular parasite they carry to the person. These larvae migrate toward a lymphatic channel,
then travel to various places within the lymphatic
system, usually positioning themselves in or near
lymph nodes throughout the body. During this time,
they mature into more developed larvae and eventually into adult worms. Depending upon the species
of round worm, this development can take a few
months or more than a year. The adult worms grow
to about 1 in (2.5 cm) to 4 in (10 cm) long.
The adult worms can live from about three to
eight years. Some have been known to live to 20
years, and in one case 40 years. The adult worms
begin reproducing numerous live embryos, called
microfilariae. The microfilariae travel to the bloodstream, where they can be ingested by a mosquito
when it takes a blood meal from the infected person.
If they are not ingested by a mosquito, the microfilariae die within about 12 months. If they are ingested by
a mosquito, they continue to mature. They are totally
dependent on their specific species of mosquito to
develop further. The cycle continues when the mosquito takes another blood meal.
Most of the symptoms an infected person
experiences are due to the blockage of the lymphatic
system by the adult worms and due to the substances (excretions and secretions) produced by the
worms.
The body’s allergic reactions may include
repeated episodes of fever, shaking chills, sweating,
headaches, vomiting, and pain. Enlarged lymph
nodes, swelling of the affected area, skin ulcers, bone
and joint pain, tiredness, and red streaks along the arm
or leg also may occur. Abscesses can form in lymph
nodes or in the lymphatic vessels. They may appear at
the surface of the skin as well.
Long-term infection with lymphatic filariasis
can lead to lymphedema, hydrocele (a buildup of
fluid in any saclike cavity or duct) in the scrotum,
and elephantiasis of the legs, scrotum, arms, penis,
breasts, and vulvae. The most common site of elephantiasis is the leg. It typically begins in the ankle
and progresses to the foot and leg. At first the
swollen leg may feel soft to the touch but eventually
becomes hard and thick. The skin may appear darkened or warty and may even crack, allowing bacteria to infect the leg and complicate the disease.
The microfilariae usually don’t cause injury. In
some instances, they cause ‘eosinophilia,’ an
increased number of eosinophils (a type of white
blood cells) in the blood.
This disease is more intense in people who never
have been exposed to lymphatic filariasis than it is in
the native people of tropical areas where the disease
occurs. This is because many of the native people often
are immunologically tolerant.
Diagnosis
The only sure way to diagnose lymphatic filariasis
is by detecting the parasite itself, either the adult
worms or the microfilariae.
Microscopic examination of the person’s bloodmay
reveal microfilariae. But many times, people who have
been infected for a long time do not have microfilariae in
their bloodstream. The absence of them, therefore, does
not mean necessarily that the person is not infected. In
these cases, examining the urine or hydrocele fluid or
performing other clinical tests is necessary.
Collecting blood from the individual for microscopic examination should be done during the night
when the microfilariae are more numerous in the
bloodstream. (Interestingly, this is when mosquitoes
bite most frequently.) During the day microfilariae
migrate to deeper blood vessels in the body, especially
in the lung. If it is decided to perform the blood test
during the day, the infected individual may be given a
‘‘provocative’’ dose of medication to provoke the
microfilariae to enter the bloodstream. Blood then
can be collected an hour later for examination.
Detecting the adult worms can be difficult because
they are deep within the lymphatic system and difficult
to get to. Biopsies usually are not performed because
they usually don’t reveal much information.
Treatment
The drug of choice in treating lymphatic filariasis
is diethylcarbamazine (DEC). The trade name in the
United States is Hetrazan.
The treatment schedule is typically 2 mg/kg per
day, three times a day, for three weeks. The drug is
taken in tablet form.
DEC kills the microfilariae quickly and injures or
kills the adult worms slowly, if at all. If all the adult
worms are not killed, remaining paired males and
females may continue to produce more larvae.
Therefore, several courses of DEC treatment over a
long time period may be necessary to rid the individual
of the parasites.
DEC has been shown to reduce the size of
enlarged lymph nodes and, when taken long-term, to
reduce elephantiasis. In India, DEC has been given in
the form of a medicated salt, which helps prevent
spread of the disease.
The side effects of DEC almost all are due to the
body’s natural allergic reactions to the dying parasites
rather than to the DEC itself. For this reason, DEC
must be given carefully to reduce the danger to the
individual. Side effects may include fever, chills, headache, dizziness, nausea and vomiting, itching, and joint
pain. These side effects usually occur within the first
few days of treatment. These side effects usually subside as the individual continues taking the drug.
There is an alternate treatment plan for the use of DEC. This plan is designed to kill the parasites slowly
(to reduce allergic reactions to the dead microfilariae
and dying adult worms within the body). Lower doses
of DEC are taken for the first few days, followed by
the higher dose of 2 mg/kg per day for the remaining
three weeks. In addition, steroids may be prescribed to
prevent the individual’s body from reacting severely to
the dead worms.
Another drug used is Ivermectin. Early research
studies of Ivermectin show that it is excellent in killing
microfilariae, but the effects of this drug on the adult
worms are still being investigated. It is probable that
patients will need to continue using DEC to kill the adult worms. Mild side effects of Ivermectin include
headache, fever, and myalgia.
Other means of managing lymphatic filariasis are
pressure bandages to wrap the swollen limb and elastic
stockings to help reduce the pressure. Exercising and
elevating a bandaged limb also can help reduce its size.
Surgery can be performed to reduce elephantiasis
by removing excess fatty and fibrous tissue, draining
the swelled area, and removing the dead worms.
Prognosis
With DEC treatment, the prognosis is good for
early and mild cases of lymphatic filariasis. The prognosis is poor, however, for heavy parasitic infestations.
Prevention
The two main ways to control this disease are to
take DEC preventively, which has shown to be
effective, and to reduce the number of carrier insects
in a particular area.
Avoiding mosquito bites with insecticides and
insect repellents is helpful, as is wearing protective
clothing and using bed netting.
Much effort has been made in cleaning the breeding sites (stagnant water) of mosquitoes near people’s
homes in areas where filariasis is found.
Before visiting countries where lymphatic filariasis is found, it would be wise to consult a travel physician to learn about current preventative measures.