Definition
An embolism is an obstruction in a blood vessel
due to a blood clot or other foreign matter that gets
stuck while traveling through the bloodstream. The
plural of embolism is emboli.
Description
Emboli have moved from the place where they
were formed through the bloodstream to another
part of the body, where they obstruct an artery and
block the flow of blood. The emboli are usually
formed from blood clots but are occasionally comprised of air, fat, or tumor tissue. Embolic events can
be multiple and small, or single and massive. They can
be life-threatening and require immediate emergency
medical care. There are three general categories of
emboli: arterial, gas, and pulmonary. Pulmonary
emboli are the most common.
Arterial embolism
In arterial emboli, blood flow is blocked at the
junction of major arteries, most often at the groin,
knee, or thigh. Arterial emboli are generally a complication of heart disease. An arterial embolism in the
brain (cerebral embolism) causes stroke, which can
be fatal. An estimated 5–14% of all strokes are caused
by cerebral emboli. Arterial emboli to the extremities
can lead to tissue death and amputation of the affected
limb if not treated effectively within hours. Intestines
and kidneys can also suffer damage from emboli.
Gas embolism
Gas emboli result from the compression of
respiratory gases into the blood and other tissues due
to rapid changes in environmental pressure, for example, while flying or scuba diving. As external pressure
decreases, gases (like nitrogen) that are dissolved in the
blood and other tissues become small bubbles that can
block blood flow and cause organ damage.
Pulmonary embolism
In a pulmonary embolism, a common illness, blood
flow is blocked at a pulmonary artery. When emboli
block the main pulmonary artery, and in cases where
there are no initial symptoms, a pulmonary embolism
can quickly become fatal. According to the American
Heart Association, an estimated 600,000 Americans
develop pulmonary emboli annually and 60,000 die
from it.
A pulmonary embolism is difficult to diagnose.
Less than 10% of patients who die from a pulmonary
embolism were diagnosed with the condition. More
than 90% of cases of pulmonary emboli are
complications of deep vein thrombosis, blood clots in
the deep vein of the leg or pelvis.
Causes and symptoms
Arterial emboli are usually a complication of
heart disease where blood clots form in the heart’s
chambers. Gas emboli are caused by rapid changes in
environmental pressure that could happen when flying
or scuba diving. A pulmonary embolism is caused by
blood clots that travel through the blood stream to the
lungs and block a pulmonary artery. More than 90%
of the cases of pulmonary embolism are a complication of deep vein thrombosis, which typically occurs in
patients who have had orthopedic surgery and patients
with cancer or other chronic illnesses like congestive
heart failure.
Risk factors for arterial and pulmonary emboli
include: prolonged bed rest, surgery, childbirth, heart
attack, stroke, congestive heart failure, cancer, obesity, a broken hip or leg, oral contraceptives, sickle
cell anemia, chest trauma, certain congenital heart
defects, and old age. Risk factors for gas emboli
include: scuba diving, amateur plane flight, exercise,
injury, obesity, dehydration, excessive alcohol, colds,
and medications such as narcotics and antihistamines.
Symptoms of an arterial embolism include:
 severe pain in the area of the embolism
 pale, bluish cool skin
 numbness
 tingling
 muscular weakness or paralysis
Common symptoms of a pulmonary embolism
include:
 labored breathing, sometimes accompanied by chest
pain
 a rapid pulse
 a cough that may produce sputum
 a low-grade fever
 fluid build-up in the lungs
Less common symptoms include:
 coughing up blood
 pain caused by movement or breathing
 leg swelling
 bluish skin
 fainting
 swollen neck veins
 Diagnosis
An embolism can be diagnosed through the
patient’s history, a physical exam, and diagnostic
tests. The use of various tests may change, as physicians and clinical guidelines evaluate the most effective
test in terms of accuracy and cost. For arterial emboli,
cardiac ultrasound and/or arteriography are ordered.
For a pulmonary embolism, a chest x ray, lung scan,
pulmonary angiography, electrocardiography, arterial
blood gas measurements, and venography or venous
ultrasound could be ordered.
Diagnosing an arterial embolism
Ultrasound uses sound waves to create an image
of the heart, organs, or arteries. The technologist
applies gel to a hand-held transducer, then presses it
against the patient’s body. The sound waves are converted into an image that can be displayed on a monitor. Performed in an outpatient diagnostic laboratory,
the test takes 30–60 minutes.
An arteriogram is an x ray in which a contrast
medium is injected to make the arteries visible. It can
be performed in a radiology unit, outpatient clinic, or
diagnostic center of a hospital.
Diagnosing a pulmonary embolism
A chest x ray can show fluid build-up and detect
other respiratory diseases. The perfusion lung scan
shows poor flow of blood in areas beyond blocked
arteries. The patient inhales a small amount of radiopharmaceutical and pictures of airflow into the lungs
are taken with a gamma camera. Then a different
radiopharmaceutical is injected into an arm vein and
lung blood flow is scanned. A normal result essentially
rules out a pulmonary embolism. A lung scan can be
performed in a hospital or an outpatient facility and
takes about 45 minutes.
Pulmonary angiography is one of the most reliable tests for diagnosing a pulmonary embolism.
Pulmonary angiography is a radiographic test that
involves injection of a radio contrast agent to show
the pulmonary arteries. A cinematic camera records
the blood flow through the patient, who lies on a table.
Pulmonary angiography is usually performed in a
hospital’s radiology department and takes 30–60
minutes.
An electrocardiograph shows the heart’s electrical
activity and helps distinguish a pulmonary embolism
from a heart attack. Electrodes covered with conducting jelly are placed on the patient’s chest, arms, and
legs. Impulses of the heart’s activity are traced on
paper. The test takes about 10 minutes.
Arterial blood gas measurements are sometimes
helpful but, alone, they are not diagnostic for pulmonary embolism. Blood is taken from an artery instead of
a vein, usually in the wrist.
Venography is used to look for the most likely
source of a pulmonary embolism, deep vein thrombosis. It is very accurate, but it is not used often, because
it is painful, expensive, exposes the patient to a fairly
high dose of radiation, and can cause complications.
Venography identifies the location, extent, and degree
of attachment of the blood clots and enables the condition of the deep leg veins to be assessed. A contrast
solution is injected into a foot vein through a catheter.
The physician observes the movement of the solution
through the vein with a fluoroscope while a series of
x rays are taken. Venography takes between 30–45
minutes and can be done in a physician’s office, a
laboratory, or a hospital. Radionuclide venography,
in which a radioactive isotope is injected, is occasionally used, especially if a patient has had reactions to
contrast solutions. Venous ultrasound is the preferred
evaluation of leg veins.
As noninvasive methods such as high-speed computed tomography (CT) scanning improve, they may
be used to diagnose emboli. For instance, spiral (also
called helical) CT scans may be the preferred tool for
diagnosing pulmonary embolism in pregnant women.
Treatment
Patients with emboli require immediate hospitalization. They are generally treated with clot-dissolving
and/or clot-preventing drugs. Thrombolytic therapy to
dissolve blood clots is the definitive treatment for a
severe pulmonary embolism. Streptokinase, urokinase, and recombinant tissue plasminogen activator
(TPA) are used. Heparin has been the anticoagulant
drug of choice for preventing formation of blood clots.
A new drug has been approved for treatment of acute
pulmonary emboli. Called fondaparinux (Arixtra), it
usually is administered with Warfarin, an oral anticoagulant. Warfarin is sometimes used with other
drugs to treat acute embolism events and is usually
continued after the hospitalization to help prevent
future emboli. Arixtra also has been used on an
ongoing basis to prevent pulmonary emboli.
In the case of an arterial embolism, the affected
limb is placed in a dependent position and kept warm.
Embolectomy is the treatment of choice in the majority of early cases of arterial emboli in the extremities.
In this procedure, a balloon-tipped catheter is inserted
into the artery to remove thromboembolic matter.
With a pulmonary embolism, oxygen therapy is
often used to maintain normal oxygen concentrations.
For people who can’t take anticoagulants and in some
other cases, surgery may be needed to insert a device
that filters blood returning to the heart and lungs.
Prognosis
Of patients hospitalized with an arterial embolism, 25–30% die, and 5–25% require amputation of
a limb. About 10% of patients with a pulmonary
embolism die suddenly within the first hour of onset
of the condition. The outcome for all other patients is
generally good; only 3% of patients die who are
properly diagnosed early and treated. In cases of an
undiagnosed pulmonary embolism, about 30% of
patients die.
Prevention
Embolism can be prevented in high risk patients
through antithrombotic drugs such as heparin, venous
interruption, gradient elastic stockings, and intermittent pneumatic compression of the legs. The combination of graduated compression stockings and low-dose
heparin is significantly more effective than low-dose
heparin alone.
Gradient elastic stockings, also called antiembolism stockings, decrease the risk of blood clots
by compressing superficial leg veins and forcing blood
into the deep veins. They can be knee-, thigh-, or waistlength. Many physicians order the use of stockings
before surgery and until there is no longer an elevated
risk of developing blood clots. The risk of deep vein
thrombosis after surgery is reduced 50% with the use
of these stockings. The American Heart Association
recommends that the use of graduated compression
stockings be considered for all high-risk surgical
patients.
Intermittent pneumatic compression involves
wrapping knee- or thigh-high cuffs around the legs to
prevent blood clots. The cuffs are connected to a pump
that inflates and deflates, mimicking the heart’s normal pumping action and reducing the pooling of
blood. Intermittent pneumatic compression can be
used during surgery and recovery and continues until
there is no longer an elevated risk of developing blood
clots. The American Heart Association recommends
the use of intermittent pneumatic compression for
patients who cannot take anticoagulants, for example,
spinal cord and brain trauma patients.