Definition
Emphysema is a chronic respiratory disease where
there is over-inflation of the air sacs (alveoli) in the
lungs, causing a decrease in lung function, and often,
breathlessness.
Description
Emphysema is the most common cause of death
from respiratory disease in the United States, and is
the fourth most common cause of death overall. There
are 1.8 million Americans with the disease, which
ranks fifteenth among chronic conditions that cause
limitations of activity. The disease is usually caused by
smoking, but a small number of cases are caused by an
inherited defect.
Normally functioning lungs are elastic, efficiently
expanding and recoiling as air passes freely through
the bronchus to the alveoli, where oxygen is moved
into the blood and carbon dioxide is filtered out.
When a person inhales cigarette smoke or certain
other irritants, his or her immune system responds by
releasing substances that are meant to defend the lungs
against the smoke. These substances can also attack
the cells of the lungs, but the body normally inhibits
such action with the release of other substances. In
smokers and those with the inherited defect, however,
no such prevention occurs and the lung tissue is
damaged in such a way that it loses its elasticity. The
small passageways (bronchioles) leading to the alveoli
collapse, trapping air within the alveoli. The alveoli,
unable to recoil efficiently and move the air out, over
expand and rupture. As the disease progresses, coughing and shortness of breath occur. In the later stages,
the lungs cannot supply enough oxygen to the blood.
Emphysema often occurs with other respiratory diseases, particularly chronic bronchitis. These two
diseases are often referred to as one disorder called
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Emphysema is most common among people aged
50 and older. Those with inherited emphysema may
experience the onset as early as their thirties or forties.
Men are more likely than women to develop emphysema, but female cases are increasing as the number of
female smokers rises.
Causes and symptoms
Heavy cigarette smoking causes about 80–90% of
all emphysema cases. However a few cases are the
result of an inherited deficiency of a substance called
alpha-1-antitrypsin (AAT). The number of Americans
with this deficiency is relatively small, probably no
greater than 70,000. Pipe, cigar, and marijuana smoking can also damage the lungs. While a person may be
less likely to inhale cigar and pipe smoke, these types
of smoke can also impair lung function. Marijuana
smoke may be even more damaging because it is
inhaled deeply and held in by the smoker.
The symptoms of emphysema develop gradually
over many years. It is a common occurrence for many
emphysema patients to have lost over half of their
functioning lung tissue before they become aware
that something is wrong. Shortness of breath, a chronic
mild cough (which may be productive of large amounts
of dark, thick sputum, and often dismissed as ‘‘smoker’s cough’’), and sometimes weight loss are associated with emphysema. Initially, a patient may only
notice shortness of breath when he or she is exercising.
However, as the disease progresses, it will occur with
less exertion or no exertion at all. Emphysema patients
may also develop an enlarged, or ‘‘barrel,’’, chest.
Other symptoms may be skipped breaths, difficulty
sleeping, morning headaches, increased difficulty
breathing while lying down, chronic fatigue, and swelling of the feet, ankles, or legs. Those with emphysema
are at risk for a variety of other complications resulting from weakened lung function, including
pneumonia.
Diagnosis
A variety of pulmonary function tests may be
ordered. In the early stages of emphysema, the only
result may be dysfunction of the small airways.
Patients with emphysema may show an increase in
the total amount of air that is in the lungs (total lung
capacity), but a decrease in the amount of air that can
be breathed out after taking a deep breath (vital capacity). With severe emphysema, vital capacity is substantially below normal. Spirometry, a procedure that
measures air flow and lung volume, helps in the diagnosis of emphysema.
A chest x ray is often ordered to aid in the diagnosis of emphysema, though patients in the early
stages of the disease may have normal findings.
Abnormal findings on the chest x ray include overinflation of the lungs and an abnormally increased
chest diameter. The diaphragm may appear depressed
or flattened. In addition, patients with advanced
emphysema may show a smaller or vertical heart. The
physician may observe blisters in the lungs and bulging of the accessory muscles of the respiratory system. Late in the disease, an EKG will show signs of
right ventricular failure in the heart and increased
hemoglobin due to lower levels of oxygen in the
patient’s blood.
Treatment
Treatment methods for emphysema do not cure or
reverse the damage to the lungs. However, they may
slow the progression of the disease, relieve symptoms,
and help control possibly fatal complications. The first
step in treatment for smokers is to quit, so as to prevent any further deterioration of breathing ability.
Smoking cessation programs may be effective.
Consistent encouragement along with the help of
health care professionals as well as family and friends
can help increase the success rate of someone attempting to quit.
If the patient and the health care team develop
and maintain a complete program of respiratory care,
disability can be decreased, acute episodes of illness
may be prevented, and the number of hospitalizations
reduced. However, only quitting smoking has been
shown to slow down the progression of the disease,
and among all other treatments, only oxygen therapy
has shown an increase in the survival rate.
Home oxygen therapy may improve the survival
times in those patients with advanced emphysema who
also have low blood oxygen levels. It may improve the
patient’s tolerance of exercise, as well as improve their
performance in certain aspects of brain function and
muscle coordination. The functioning of the heart may
also improve with an increased concentration of oxygen
in the blood. Oxygen may also decrease insomnia and
headaches. Some patients may only receive oxygen at
night, but studies have illustrated that it is most effective when administered at least 18, but preferably 24
hours per day. Portable oxygen tanks prescribed to
patients carry a limited supply and must be refilled on
a regular basis by a home health provider. Medicare
and most insurance companies cover a large proportion
of the cost of home oxygen therapy. Patients should be
instructed regarding special safety issues involving the
transport and presence of oxygen in the home.
A variety of medications may be used in the treatment of emphysema.Usually the patient responds best to
a combination of medicines, rather than one single drug.
Bronchodilators are sometimes used to help alleviate the patient’s symptoms by relaxing and opening
the airways. They can be inhaled, taken by mouth, or
injected. Another category of medication often used is
corticosteroids or steroids. These help to decrease the
inflammation of the airway walls. They are occasionally used if bronchodilators are ineffective in preventing airway obstruction. Some patients’ lung function
improves with corticosteroids, and inhaled steroids
may be beneficial to patients with few side effects. A
variety of antibiotics are frequently given at the first
sign of a respiratory infection, such as increased
amounts of sputum, or if there has been a change in
the color of the sputum. Expectorants can help to
loosen respiratory secretions, enabling the patient to
more easily expel them from the airways.
Many of the medications prescribed involve the
use of a metered dose inhaler (MDI) that may require
special instruction to be used correctly. MDIs are a
convenient and safe method of delivering medication
to the lungs. However, if they are used incorrectly the
medication will not get to the right place. Proper technique is essential for the medication to be effective.
For some patients, surgical treatment may be the
best option. Lung volume reduction surgery is a surgical procedure in which the most diseased parts of the
lung are removed to enable the remaining lung
and breathing muscles to work more efficiently.
Preliminary studies suggest improved survival rates
and better functioning with the surgery. Another surgical procedure used for emphysema patients is lung
transplantation. Transplantation may involve one or
both lungs. However, it is a risky and expensive procedure, and donor organs may not be available.
For those patients with advanced emphysema,
keeping the air passages reasonably clear of secretions
can prove difficult. Some common methods for mobilizing and removing secretions include:
 Postural drainage. This helps to remove secretions
from the airways. The patient lies in a position that
allows gravity to aid in draining different parts of the
lung. This is often done after the patient inhales an
aerosol medication. The basic position involves the
patient lying on the bed with his chest and head over
the side and the forearms resting on the floor.
 Chest percussion. This technique involves lightly
clapping the back and chest, and may help to loosen
thick secretions.
 Coughing and deep breathing. These techniques may
aid the patient in bringing up secretions.
 Aerosol treatments. These treatments may involve
solutions of saline, often mixed with a bronchodilator, which are then inhaled as an aerosol. The aerosols thin and loosen secretions. A treatment normally
takes 10 to 15 minutes, and is given three or four
times a day.
Patients with COPD can learn to perform a variety of self-help measures that may help improve their
symptoms and their ability to participate in everyday
activities. These measures include:
 Avoiding any exposure to dusts and fumes.
 Avoiding air pollution, including the cigarette smoke
of others.
 Avoiding other people who have infections like the
cold or flu. Get a pneumonia vaccination and a yearly
flu shot.
 Drinking plenty of fluids. This helps to loosen
respiratory secretions so they can be brought up
more easily through coughing.
 Avoiding extreme temperatures of heat or cold. Also
avoiding high altitudes. (Special precautions can be
taken that may enable the emphysema patient to fly
on a plane.)
 Maintaining adequate nutritional intake. Normally
a high protein diet taken in many small feedings is
recommended.
Alternative treatment
Many patients are interested in whether any alternative treatments for emphysema are available. Some
practitioners recommend supplements of antioxidant
nutrients. There have also been some studies indicating a correlation between a low Vitamin A levels and
COPD, with suggestions that supplements of vitamin
A might be beneficial. Aromatherapists have used
essential oils like eucalyptus, lavender, pine, and
rosemary to help relieve nasal congestion and make
breathing easier. The herb elecampane may act as an
expectorant to help patients clear mucus from the
lungs. The patient should discuss these remedies with
their health care practitioner prior to trying them, as
some may interact with the more traditional treatments that are already being used.
Prognosis
Emphysema is a serious and chronic disease that
cannot be reversed. If detected early, the effects and
progression can be slowed, particularly if the patient
stops smoking immediately. Complications of emphysema include higher risks for pneumonia and acute
bronchitis. Overall, the prognosis for patients with
emphysema is poor, with a survival rate for all those
with COPD of four years, and even less for emphysema. However, individual cases vary and many
patients can live much longer with supplemental oxygen and other treatment measures.
Prevention
The best way to prevent emphysema is to avoid
smoking. Even patients with inherited emphysema
should avoid smoking, as it especially worsens the
onset and severity. If patients quit smoking as soon
as evidence of small airway obstruction begins, they
can significantly improve their prognosis.