Definition
Empyema is a condition in which pus and fluid
from infected tissue collects in a body cavity. The
name comes from the Greek word empyein meaning
pus-producing (suppurate). Empyema is most often
used to refer to collections of pus in the space around
the lungs (pleural cavity), but sometimes refers to
similar collections in the gall bladder or the pelvic
cavity. Empyema in the pleural cavity is sometimes
called empyema thoracis, or empyema of the chest,
to distinguish it from empyema elsewhere in the body.
Description
Empyema may have a number of causes but is
most frequently a complication of pneumonia. Its
development can be divided into three phases: an
acute phase in which the body cavity fills with a thin
fluid containing some pus; a second stage in which the
fluid thickens and a fibrous, coagulation protein
(fibrin) begins to accumulate within the cavity; and a
third or chronic stage in which the lung or other organ
is encased within a thick covering of fibrous material.
Causes and symptoms
Empyema thoracis can be caused by a number of
different organisms, including bacteria, fungi, and amebas, in connection with pneumonia, chest wounds, chest
surgery, lung abscesses, or a ruptured esophagus. The
infective organism can get into the pleural cavity either
through the bloodstream or other circulatory system, in
secretions from lung tissue, or on the surfaces of surgical
instruments or objects that cause open chestwounds. The
most common organisms that cause empyema are
the following bacteria: Streptococcus pneumoniae,
Haemophilus influenzae, and Staphylococcus aureus.
 S. aureus is the most common cause in all age groups,
accounting for 90% of cases of empyema in infants and
children. Pelvic empyema in women is most often caused
by Bacteroides strains or Pseudomonas aeruginosa. In
elderly, chronically ill, or alcoholic patients, empyema is
often caused byKlebsiella pneumoniae species of bacteria.
When the disease organisms arrive in the cavity
surrounding the lungs, they infect the tissues that
cover the lungs and line the chest wall. As the body
attempts to fight off the infection, the cavity fills up
with tissue fluid, pus, and dead tissue cells. Empyema
of the gall bladder or pelvis results from similar reactions to infection in those parts of the body.
The signs and symptoms of empyema vary somewhat according to the location of the infection and its
severity. In empyema thoracis, patients usually exhibit
symptoms of pneumonia, including fever, cough, fatigue, shortness of breath, and chest pain. They may
prefer to lie on the side of the body affected by the
empyema. Family members may notice bad breath. In
severe cases, the patient may become dehydrated,
cough up blood or greenish-brown sputum, run a
fever as high as 1058F (40.68C), or fall into a coma.
Patients with thoracic empyema may develop
potentially life-threatening complications if the condition is not treated. The infected tissues may develop
large collections of pus (abscesses) that can rupture
into the patient’s airway, or the infection may spread
to the tissues surrounding the heart. In extreme cases
the empyema may spread to the brain by means of
bacteria carried in the bloodstream.
In pelvic empyema, the infection produces large
amounts of thick, foul-smelling pus that is rapidly
replaced even after drainage. Empyema of the gallbladder is marked by intense pain on the upper right
side of the abdomen, high fever, and rigidity of the
muscles over the infected area.
Diagnosis
A physician may consider the possibility of
empyema thoracis in patients with pneumonia or
other symptoms of lung infection. When listening to
sounds within the patient’s chest with a stethoscope,
the sounds of breathing will be partly muffled and
harder to hear in the patients with empyema. The
area of the chest over the infection will sound dull
when tapped or thumped (percussed). On an x ray,
empyema thoracis will appear as a cloudy or opaque
area. The amount of fluid present in the pleural cavity
can be estimated using an ultrasound imaging procedure. The diagnosis of empyema, however, has to be
confirmed with laboratory tests because its symptoms
can be caused by other disease conditions.
The diagnosis of empyema is usually confirmed by
analyzing a sample of fluid taken from the pleural
cavity. The sample is obtained by a procedure called
thoracentesis. In this procedure, the patient is given a
local anesthetic, a needle is inserted into the pleural
cavity through the back between the ribs on the
infected side, and a sample of fluid is withdrawn. If
the patient has empyema, there will be a very high level
of one particular kind of immune cell (white blood
cells), a high level of protein, and a very low level of
blood sugar. The fluid can also be tested for the specific disease organism by staining or tissue cultures. In
some cases, the color, smell, or consistency of the
tissue fluid also helps to confirm the diagnosis.
Treatment
Empyema is treated using a combination of
medications and surgical techniques. Treatment with
medication involves intravenously administering a
two-week course of antibiotics. It is important to give
antibiotics as soon as possible to prevent first-stage
empyema from progressing to its later stages. The
antibiotics most commonly used are penicillin and
vancomycin. Patients experiencing difficulty breathing are also given oxygen therapy.
Surgical treatment of empyema has two goals:
drainage of the infected fluid and closing up of the
space left in the pleural cavity. If the infection is still in
its early stages, the fluid can be drained by thoracentesis. In second-stage empyema, the surgeon will insert
a chest tube in the patient’s rib cage or remove part of
a rib (rib resection) in order to drain the fluid. In thirdstage empyema, the surgeon may cut or peel away the
thick fibrous layer coating the lung. This procedure is
called decortication. When the fibrous covering is
removed, the lung will expand to fill the space in the
chest cavity. The doctor can use video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) techniques to position the chest
tube or to perform a limited decortication. The VATS
technique allows a physician to see within the body
during certain surgical procedures. Empyema of the
gallbladder is a serious condition that is treated with
intravenous antibiotics and surgical removal of the
gallbladder.
Prognosis
The prognosis for recovery is generally good,
except in those cases with complications, such as a
brain abscess or blood poisoning, or cases caused by
certain types of streptococci.