Definition
Endarterectomy is an operation to remove or
bypass the fatty deposits, or blockage, in an artery
narrowed by the buildup of fatty tissue
(atherosclerosis).
Purpose
Removing the fatty deposits restores normal
blood flow to the part of the body supplied by the
artery. An endarterectomy is performed to treat cerebrovascular disease in which there is a serious reduction of blood supply to the brain (carotid
endarterectomy), or to treat peripheral vascular disease
(impaired blood supply to the legs).
Endarterectomy is most often performed on one
of the two main arteries in the neck (the carotids)
opening the narrowed arteries leading to the brain.
When performed by an experienced surgeon, the practice is extremely effective, reducing the risk of stroke
by up to 70%. Recent studies indicate it is effective in
preventing stroke, even among those patients who had
no warning signs except narrowed arteries detected by
their doctors on a routine exam.
Precautions
Before the surgery, a full medical exam is usually
done to assess any specific health problems, such as
diabetes, high blood pressure, heart disease, or stroke.
If possible, reversible health problems, such as cigarette smoking or being overweight, should be corrected.
Description
Carotid artery disease
Every person has four carotid arteries (the internal and external carotids on each side of the neck)
through which blood from the heart moves into the
brain. If one of these arteries becomes blocked by fat
and cholesterol, the patient may have a range of symptoms, including:
 weakness in one arm, leg, half of the face, or one
entire side of the body
 numbness or tingling
 paralysis of an arm, leg, or face
 slurred speech
 dizziness
 confusion, fainting, or coma
 stroke
Removing this fatty buildup, or bypassing a
blocked segment, may restore blood flow to the
brain, eliminate or decrease the symptoms, and lessen
the risk of a stroke.
Peripheral vascular disease
When the blood vessels in the legs (and sometimes
the arms) become narrowed, this can restrict blood
flow and cause pain in the affected area. In severe
cases, the tissue may die, requiring amputation.
The narrowing is usually caused by buildup of
fatty plaques in the vessels, often as the result of
smoking, high blood pressure, or poorly-controlled
diabetes mellitus. The vessels usually narrow slowly,
but it’s possible for a blood clot to form quickly,
causing sudden severe pain in the affected leg or arm.
Procedure
Endarterectomy is a delicate operation that may
require several hours. The surgeon begins by making
an incision over the blocked artery and inserting a tube
above and below the blockage to redirect the blood
flow while the artery is opened.
Next, the surgeon removes the fat and cholesterol
buildup, along with any blood clots that have formed,
with a blunt dissecting instrument. Then the surgeon
bathes the clean wall in salt solution combined with
heparin, an anticoagulant. Then the surgeon stitches
the artery just enough so that the bypass shunt tube
can be removed, and then he/she stitches the artery
completely closed. After checking to make sure no
blood is leaking, the surgeon next closes the skin incision with stitches.
The operation should improve symptoms,
although its long-term effects may be more limited,
since arterial narrowing is rarely confined to one area
of one artery. If narrowing is a problem throughout
the body, arterial reconstructive surgery may be
required.
The total cost of an endarterectomy, including
diagnostic tests, surgery, hospitalization, and followup care, will vary according to hospital, doctor, and
area of the country where the operation is performed,
but a patient can expect to pay in the range of $15,000.
Patients who are very young, very old, or very ill, or
who need more extensive surgery, may require more
expensive treatment.
Preparation
Before surgery, the doctor pinpoints the location
of the narrowed artery with an x-ray procedure called
angiography. For surgery to be effective, the degree of
narrowing should be at least 70%, but it should not be
total. Patients undergoing angiography are given a
local anesthetic, but the endarterectomy itself requires
the use of a general anesthesia.
Aftercare
After the surgery, the patient spends the first two
days lying flat in bed. Patients who have had carotid
endarterectomy should not bend the neck sharply during this time. Because the blood flow to the brain is
now greatly increased, patients may experience a brief
but severe headache, or lightheadedness. There may be
a slight loss of sensation in the skin, or maybe a droop
in the mouth, if any of the nerves in the neck were
lightly bruised during surgery. In time, this should
correct itself.
Risks
The amount of risk depends on the hospital, the
skill of the surgeon, and the severity of underlying disease. Patients who have just had an acute stroke are at
greatest risk. During carotid artery surgery, blood flow
is interrupted through the artery, so that paralysis and
other stroke symptoms may occur. These may resolve
after surgery, or may result in permanent stroke.
Paralysis is usually one-sided; other stroke symptoms
may include loss of half the field of vision, loss of
sensation, double vision, speech problems, and personality changes. Risks of endarterectomy to treat either
carotid artery or peripheral vascular disease include:
 reactions to anesthesia
 bleeding
 infection
 blood clots
 Normal results
The results after successful surgery are usually
striking. The newly opened artery should help to
restore normal blood flow. In carotid endarterectomy,
surgery should prevent the risk of brain damage and
stroke. However, the buildup of fat and cholesterol
usually affects all arteries, not just the one that was
operated on. Affected arteries in other parts of the
body may be equally clogged and potentially dangerous. Even arteries that were operated electively will
likely begin to clog up again after the surgery.
For this reason, lifestyle changes (no smoking,
low fat, low cholesterol diet) are important, especially
if diet and lifestyle contributed to the development of
the problem in the first place.