Endoscopic sphincterotomy or endoscopic retrograde sphincterotomy (ERS) is a relatively new endoscopic technique developed to examine and treat
abnormalities of the bile ducts, pancreas and gallbladder. The procedure was developed as an extension to
the diagnostic examination, ERCP (endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography); with the addition
of ‘‘sphincterotomy,’’ abnormalities found during the
study could be treated at the same time without the
need for invasive surgery.
The term ERS has three parts to its definition;
 endoscopic refers to the use of an endoscope
 retrograde refers to the insertion of the endoscope up
into the ducts in a direction opposite to or against the
normal flow of bile down the ducts
 sphincterotomy, which means cutting of the sphincter or muscle that lies at the juncture of the intestine
with both the bile and pancreatic ducts.
Purpose
Until the 1970s, patients with symptoms related to
disease of the bile ducts or pancreas frequently needed
surgery to diagnose the cause and treat any abnormalities. ERCP allowed physicians for the first time to
obtain high quality x rays of the common bile and
pancreatic ducts, and detect areas of narrowing (strictures), stones, and tumors. ERCP was not initially
designed for treatment. ERS was developed shortly
after and enabled physicians to treat the abnormalities
identified by the injection of dye and x rays.
The revolutionary technique made possible the
endoscopic removal of stones and stretching of areas
of narrowing (strictures). It has since been expanded
to include drainage of bile from blocked ducts and
treatment of various abnormalities of the pancreas.
Precautions
The most important precaution related to both
ERCP and ERS is to have the procedure performed
by an experienced physician. ERS is technically more
difficult than many other gastrointestinal endoscopic
studies, including ERCP. Patients should inquire as to
the physician’s experience with the procedure. The
physician should also be informed of any allergies,
medication use, and medical problems.
Description
ERS is generally performed only after ERCP has
been successfully accomplished and detail of the anatomy and abnormalities is known. During ERS, a number of various instruments are inserted through the
endoscope in order to ‘‘cut’’ or stretch the sphincter.
Once this is done, additional instruments are passed
that enable the removal of stones and the stretching of
narrowed regions of the ducts. Drains (stents) can also
be used to prevent a narrowed area from rapidly returning to its previously narrowed state.
Preparation
The upper intestinal tract must be empty for the
procedure, so patients must not eat or drink for at least
six to 12 hours before the exam. Patients need to
inquire about taking their medications before the procedure. Some patients may require antibiotics before
and/or after the procedure. When possible, aspirin or
NSAIDS should not be taken within several days
before the procedure, because they interfere with
blood clotting.
Aftercare
When ERS is performed, physicians will usually
want to observe the patient closely for several hours to
ensure that there are no signs of complications. Pain or
any other unusual symptoms should be reported.
Admission to the hospital may be advised.
Risks
ERS complications are related either to the drugs
used during the procedure, or the results of dye injection or cutting of tissue. The overall complication rate
is 5–10%. During the exam, the endoscopist can cut or
stretch structures (such as the muscle leading to the
bile duct) to treat the cause of the patient’s symptoms.
Cutting or stretching of these structures can sometimes cause a hole or perforation. The use of sedatives
also carries a risk of decreasing cardiac and respiratory function, however, it is very difficult to perform
these procedures without these drugs.
Other major complications related to ERCP or
ERS are pancreatitis (inflammation of the pancreas)
and cholangitis (inflammation of the bile ducts).
Bacteremia (the passage of bacteria into the blood
stream) and bleeding are also risks.
Normal results
Certain standards have been set for the diameter
or width of the pancreatic and bile ducts.
Measurements by x ray are used to determine if the
ducts are too large (dilated) or too narrow (strictured).
Lastly, the ducts and gallbladder should be free of any
solid particles, such as stones, and free of areas of
narrowing.