Definition
Endorectal ultrasound (ERUS) is a procedure
where a probe is inserted into the rectum and high
frequency sound waves (ultrasound waves) are generated. The pattern of echoes as they bounce off tissues is
converted into a picture (sonogram) on a television
screen.
Purpose
ERUS is used as a diagnostic procedure in rectal
cancer to determine stage of the tumor and as a postradiation, presurgical examination to assess extent of
tumor shrinkage. ERUS can also be used in cases of
anal fistula (an abnormal passage) and problems with
the anal sphincter muscles (muscles that control the
opening and closing of the anus).
Precautions
Normal precautions should be taken with any
diagnostic procedure. Since the population in which
this procedure is normally done is elderly, the imaging
staff should be extra cautious about stressing the
patient. The procedure is invasive and may be embarrassing to some. Other patients may be anxious about
their medical condition since endorectal ultrasounds
are not routine. This places an added burden on
already stressed hearts and nervous systems.
Physicians, nurses, and technicians may need to be
prepared for stress reactions that could include the
heart, asthma, or anxious behaviors.
Description
ERUS has been used as a means to determine the
depth of rectal cancers and to assess whether the
tumor has affected surrounding tissues. This pre-treatment procedure has proven to be an accurate tool for
tailoring surgery for patients.
Problems with interpretation of the sonograms
after radiation and before surgery have resulted in
tumors being identified that were merely the formation of fibrous tissues that remained after the tumors
had been eliminated by the radiation. Yet, some of the
fibrous areas actually hid residual tumors. Rectal
anatomy itself can affect the accuracy of ultrasound
reading. This makes ERUS problematic in determining the amount of tumor reduction a patient has after
radiation therapy.
Preparation
The patient must evacuate the bowels completely
before the procedure is done. This usually is assisted
though the use of several enemas. The patient may be
told to adhere to a liquid diet the day prior to doing
this procedure. The probe is inserted, usually with
little discomfort for the patient since it will only be
examining the first few inches of the colon.
Aftercare
Since ERUS is a minor invasive procedure, there
is no aftercare.
Risks
There are no risks to having an ultrasound.
Normal results
Normal results after an endorectal ultrasound are
normal, healthy tissues.
Abnormal results
Abnormal results range from any number of congenital deformities in the lining of the rectum to serious rectal cancers.