Definition
The endocardium is the inner lining of the heart
muscle, which also covers the heart valves. When the
endocardium becomes damaged, bacteria from the
blood stream can become lodged on the heart valves
or heart lining. The resulting infection is known as
endocarditis.
Description
The endocardium lines all four chambers of the
heart–two at the top (the right and left atria) and two
at the bottom (the right and left ventricles)–through
which blood passes as the heart beats. It also covers
the four valves (the tricuspid valve, the pulmonary
valve, the mitral valve, and the aortic valve), which
normally open and close to allow the blood to flow in
only one direction through the heart during each
contraction.
For the heart to pump blood efficiently, the four
chambers must contract and relax, and the four valves
must open and close, in a well coordinated fashion. By
damaging the valves or the walls of the heart chambers, endocarditis can interfere with the ability of the
heart to do its job.
Endocarditis rarely occurs in people with healthy,
normal hearts. Rather, it most commonly occurs when
there is damage to the endocardium. The endocardium
may be affected by a congenital heart defect, such as
mitral valve prolapse, in which blood leaks through a
poorly functioning mitral valve back into the heart. It
may also be damaged by a prior scarring of the heart
muscle, such as rheumatic fever, or replacement of a
heart valve. Any of these conditions can damage the
endocardium and make it more susceptible to
infection.
Bacteria can get into the blood stream (a condition
known as bacteremia) in a number of different ways: It
may spread from a localized infection such as a urinary
tract infection, pneumonia, or skin infection or get into
the blood stream as a result of certain medical conditions, such as severe periodontal disease, colon cancer,
or inflammatory bowel disease. It can enter the blood
stream during minor procedures, such as periodontal
surgery, tooth extractions, teeth cleaning, tonsil
removal, prostate removal, or endoscopic examination.
It can also be introduced through in-dwelling catheters,
which are used for intravenous medications, intravenous feeding, or dialysis. In people who use intravenous
drugs, the bacteria can enter the blood stream through
unsterilized, contaminated needles and syringes.
(People who are prone to endocarditis generally need
to take prescribed antibiotics before certain surgical or
dental procedures to help prevent this infection.)
If not discovered and treated, infective endocarditis can permanently damage the heart muscle, especially the valves. For the heart to work properly, all
four valves must be functioning well, opening at the
right time to let blood flow in the right direction and
closing at the right time to keep the blood from flowing in the wrong direction. If the valve is damaged, this
may allow blood to flow backward–a condition
known as regurgitation. As a result of a poorly functioning valve, the heart muscle has to work harder to
pump blood and may become weakened, leading to
heart failure. Heart failure is a chronic condition in
which the heart is unable to pump blood well enough
to supply blood adequately to the body.
Another danger associated with endocarditis is
that the vegetation formed by bacteria colonizing on
heart valves may break off, forming emboli. These
emboli may travel through the circulation and become
lodged in blood vessels. By blocking the flow of blood,
emboli can starve various tissues of nutrients and
oxygen, damaging them. For instance, an embolus
lodged in the blood vessels of the lungs may cause
pneumonia-like symptoms. An embolus may also
affect the brain, damaging nerve tissue, or the kidneys,
causing kidney disease. Emboli may also weaken the
tiny blood vessels called capillaries, causing hemorrhages (leaking blood vessels) throughout the body.
Causes and symptoms
Most cases of infective endocarditis occur in
people between the ages of 15 and 60, with a median age at onset of about 50 years. Men are
affected about twice as often as women are. Other
factors that put people at increased risk for endocarditis are congenital heart problems, heart surgery, previous episodes of endocarditis, and
intravenous drug use.
While there is no single specific symptom of
endocarditis, a number of symptoms may be present. The most common symptom is a mild fever,
which rarely goes above 1028F (38.98C). Other
symptoms include chills, weakness, cough, trouble
breathing, headaches, aching joints, and loss of
appetite.
Emboli may also cause a variety of symptoms,
depending on their location. Emboli throughout the
body may cause Osler’s nodes, small, reddish, painful
bumps most commonly found on the inside of fingers
and toes. Emboli may also cause petechiae, tiny purple or red spots on the skin, resulting from hemorrhages under the skin’s surface. Tiny hemorrhages
resembling splinters may also appear under the fingernails or toenails. If emboli become lodged in the
blood vessels of the lungs, they may cause coughing
or shortness of breath. Emboli lodged in the brain
may cause symptoms of a mini-stroke, such as numbness, weakness, or paralysis on one side of the body
or sudden vision loss or double vision. Emboli may
also damage the kidneys, causing blood to appear in
the urine. Sometimes the capillaries on the surface of
the spleen rupture, causing the spleen to become
enlarged and tender to the touch. Anyone experiencing any of these symptoms should seek medical help
immediately.
Diagnosis
Doctors begin the diagnosis by taking a history, asking the patient about the symptoms mentioned above. During a physical examination, the
doctor may also uncover signs such as fever, an
enlarged spleen, signs of kidney disease, or hemorrhaging. Listening to the patient’s chest with a
stethoscope, the doctor may also hear a heart murmur. A heart murmur may indicate abnormal flow
of blood through one of the heart chambers or
valves.
Doctors take a sample of the patient’s blood to
test it for bacteria and other microorganisms that
may be causing the infection. They usually also use
a test called echocardiography, which uses ultrasound
waves to make images of the heart, to check for
abnormalities in the structure of the heart wall or
valves. One of the tell-tale signs they look for in
echocardiography is vegetation, the abnormal
growth of tissue around a valve composed of blood
platelets, bacteria, and a clotting protein called
fibrin. Another tell-tale sign is regurgitation, or the
backward flow of blood, through one of the heart
valves. A normal echocardiogram does not exclude
the possibility of endocarditis, but an abnormal
echocardiogram can confirm its presence. If an echocardiogram cannot be done or its results are inconclusive, a modified technique called transesophageal
echocardiography is sometimes performed.
Transesophageal echocardiography involves passing
an ultrasound device into the esophagus to get a
clearer image of the heart.Treatment
When doctors suspect infective endocarditis, they
will admit the patient to a hospital and begin treating
the infection before they even have the results of the
blood culture. Their choice of antibiotics depends on
what the most likely infecting microorganism is. Once
the results of the blood culture become available, the
doctor can adjust the medications, using specific antibiotics known to be effective against the specific
microorganism involved.
Unfortunately, in recent years, the treatment of
endocarditis has become more complicated as a result
of antibiotic resistance. Over the past few years, especially as antibiotics have been overprescribed, more
and more strains of bacteria have become increasingly
resistant to a wider range of antibiotics. For this reason, doctors may need to try a few different types of
antibiotics–or even a combination of antibiotics–to
successfully treat the infection. Antibiotics are usually
given for about one month, but may need to be given
for an even longer period of time if the infection is
resistant to treatment.
Once the fever and the worst of the symptoms
have gone away, the patient may be able to continue
antibiotic therapy at home. During this time, the
patient should make regular visits to the health care
team for further testing and physical examination to
make sure that the antibiotic therapy is working, that
it is not causing adverse side effects, and that there are
no complications such as emboli or heart failure. The
patient should alert the health-care team to any symptoms that could indicate serious complications: For
instance, trouble breathing or swelling in the legs
could indicate congestive heart failure. Headache,
joint pain, blood in the urine, or stroke symptoms
could indicate an embolus, and fever and chills could
indicate that the treatment is not working and the
infection is worsening. Finally, diarrhea, rash, itching,
or joint pain may suggest a bad reaction to the antibiotics. Anyone experiencing any of these symptoms
should alert the health care team immediately.
In some cases, surgery may be needed. These
include cases of congestive heart failure, recurring
emboli, infection that doesn’t respond to treatment,
poorly functioning heart valves, and endocarditis
involving prosthetic (artificial) valves. The most common surgical treatment involves cutting away (debriding) damaged tissue and replacing the damaged valve.
Prognosis
If left untreated, infective endocarditis continues
to progress and is always fatal. However, if it is diagnosed and properly treated within the first six weeks of
infection, the infection can be completely cured in
about 90% of the cases. The prognosis depends on a
number of factors, such as the patient’s age and overall
physical condition, the severity of the diseases
involved, the exact site of the infection, how vulnerable the microorganisms are to antibiotics, and
what kind of complications the endocarditis may be
causing.
Prevention
Some people are especially prone to endocarditis.
These include people with past episodes of endocarditis, those with congenital heart problems or heart
damage from rheumatic fever, and those with artificial
heart valves. Intravenous drug users are also at
increased risk. Anyone who falls into a high-risk category should alert his or her health-care professionals
before undergoing any surgical or dental procedures.
High-risk patients must be treated in advance with
antibiotics before these procedures to minimize the
risk of infection.