Definition
Endometriosis is a condition in which bits of the
tissue similar to the lining of the uterus (endometrium)
grow in other parts of the body. Like the uterine lining,
this tissue builds up and sheds in response to monthly
hormonal cycles. However, there is no natural outlet
for the blood discarded from these implants. Instead,
it falls onto surrounding organs, causing swelling and
inflammation. This repeated irritation leads to the
development of scar tissue and adhesions in the area
of the endometrial implants.
Description
Endometriosis is estimated to affect 7% of women
of childbearing age in the United States. It most commonly strikes between the ages of 25 and 40.
Endometriosis can also appear in the teen years, but
never before the start of menstruation. It is seldom
seen in postmenopausal women.
Endometriosis was once called the ‘‘career
woman’s disease’’ because it was thought to be a product of delayed childbearing. The statistics defy such a
narrow generalization; however, pregnancy may slow
the progress of the condition. A more important predictor of a woman’s risk is if her female relatives have
endometriosis. Another influencing factor is the
length of a woman’s menstrual cycle. Women whose
periods last longer than a week with an interval of less
than 27 days between them seem to be more prone to
the condition.
Endometrial implants are most often found on the
pelvic organs—the ovaries, uterus, fallopian tubes,
and in the cavity behind the uterus. Occasionally,
this tissue grows in such distant parts of the body as
the lungs, arms, and kidneys. Newly formed implants
appear as small bumps on the surfaces of the organs
and supporting ligaments and are sometimes said to
look like ‘‘powder burns.’’ Ovarian cysts may form
around endometrial tissue (endometriomas) and may
range from pea to grapefruit size. Endometriosis is a
progressive condition that usually advances slowly,
over the course of many years. Doctors rank cases
from minimal to severe based on factors such as the
number and size of the endometrial implants, their
appearance and location, and the extent of the scar
tissue and adhesions in the vicinity of the growths.
Causes and symptoms
Although the exact cause of endometriosis is
unknown, a number of theories have been put
forward. Some of the more popular ones are:
 Implantation theory. Originally proposed in the
1920s, this theory states that a reversal in the direction
of menstrual flow sends discarded endometrial cells
into the body cavity where they attach to internal
organs and seed endometrial implants. There is considerable evidence to support this explanation.
Reversed menstrual flow occurs in 70–90% of
women and is thought to be more common in women
with endometriosis. However, many women with
reversed menstrual flow do not develop endometriosis.
 Vascular-lymphatic theory. This theory suggests that
the lymph system or blood vessels (vascular system)
is the vehicle for the distribution of endometrial cells
out of the uterus.
 Coelomic metaplasia theory. According to this
hypothesis, remnants of tissue left over from prenatal
development of the woman’s reproductive tract transforms into endometrial cells throughout the body.
 Induction theory. This explanation postulates that
an unidentified substance found in the body forces
cells from the lining of the body cavity to change into
endometrial cells.
In addition to these theories, the following factors
are thought to influence the development of
endometriosis:
 Heredity. A woman’s chance of developing endometriosis is seven times greater if her mother or sisters
have the disease.
 Immune system function. Women with endometriosis may have lower functioning immune systems that
have trouble eliminating stray endometrial cells. This
would explain why a high percentage of women
experience reversed menstrual flow while relatively
few develop endometriosis.
 Dioxin exposure. Some research suggests a link
between the exposure to dioxin (TCCD), a toxic
chemical found in weed killers, and the development
of endometriosis.
While many women with endometriosis suffer
debilitating symptoms, others have the disease without knowing it. Paradoxically, there does not seem to
be any relation between the severity of the symptoms
and the extent of the disease. The most common symptoms are:
 Menstrual pain. Pain in the lower abdomen that
begins a day or two before the menstrual period
starts and continues through to the end is typical of
endometriosis. Some women also report lower back
aches and pain during urination and bowel movement, especially during their periods.
 Painful sexual intercourse. Pressure on the vagina
and cervix causes severe pain for some women.
 Abnormal bleeding. Heavy menstrual periods, irregular bleeding, and spotting are common features of
endometriosis.
 Infertility. There is a strong association between
endometriosis and infertility, although the reasons
for this have not been fully explained. It is thought
that the build up of scar tissue and adhesions blocks
the fallopian tubes and prevents the ovaries from
releasing eggs. Endometriosis may also affect fertility
by causing hormonal irregularities and a higher rate
of early miscarriage.
Diagnosis
If a doctor suspects endometriosis, the first step
will be to perform a pelvic exam to try to feel if
implants are present. Very often there is no strong
evidence of endometriosis from a physical exam. The
only way to make a definitive diagnosis is through
minor surgery called a laparoscopy. A laparoscope, a
slender scope with a light on the end, is inserted into
the woman’s abdomen through a small incision near
her belly button. This allows the doctor to examine the
internal organs for endometriotic growths. Often, a
sample of tissue is taken for later examination in the
laboratory. Endometriosis is sometimes discovered
when a woman has abdominal surgery for another
reason such as tubal ligation or hysterectomy.
Various imaging techniques such as ultrasound,
computed tomography scan (CT scan), or magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) can offer additional
information but aren’t useful in making the initial diagnosis. A blood test may also be ordered because women
with endometriosis have higher levels of the blood protein CA125. Testing for this substance before and after
treatment can predict a recurrence of the disease, but
the test is not reliable as a diagnostic tool.
Treatment
How endometriosis is treated depends on the
woman’s symptoms, her age, the extent of the disease,
and her personal preferences. The condition cannot be
fully eradicated without surgery. Conservative treatment focuses on managing the pain, preserving fertility, and delaying the progress of the condition.
Pain relief
Over-the-counter pain relievers such as aspirin
and acetaminophen (Tylenol) are useful for mild
cramping and menstrual pain. Prescription-strength
and over-the-counter nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen (Motrin, Advil)
and naproxen (Naprosyn), are also effective. If pain is
severe, a doctor may prescribe narcotic medications,
although these can be addicting and are rarely used.
Hormonal treatments
Hormonal therapies effectively tame endometriosis but also act as contraceptives. A woman who is
hoping to become pregnant would take these medications for a period of time, then try to conceive within
several months of discontinuing treatment.
 Oral contraceptives. Continuously taking estrogenprogestin pills tricks the body into thinking it is
pregnant. This state of pseudopregnancy means
reduced pelvic pain and a temporary withering of
endometrial implants.
 Danazol (Danocrine) and gestrinone are synthetic
male hormones that lower estrogen levels, prevent
menstruation, and shrink endometrial tissues. On the
downside, they lead to weight gain and menopauselike symptoms, and cause some women to develop
masculine characteristics.
 Progestins. Medroxyprogesterone (Depo-Provera)
and related drugs may also be used in treating endometriosis. They have been proven effective in minimizing pain and halting the progress of the
condition, but are rarely used because of the high
rate of side effects.
 Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnHR) agonists.
These estrogen-inhibiting drugs successfully limit
pain and prevent the growth of endometrial
implants. They can cause menopause symptoms,
however, and doses have to be regulated to prevent
bone loss associated with low estrogen levels.
Surgery
Removing the uterus, ovaries, and fallopian tubes
is the only permanent method of eliminating endometriosis. This is an extreme measure that deprives a
woman of her ability to bear children and forces her
body into menopause. Endometrial implants and
ovarian cysts can be removed with laser surgery performed through a laparoscope. For women with minimal endometriosis, this technique is usually successful
in reducing pain and slowing the condition’s progress.
It may also help infertile women increase their chances
of becoming pregnant.
Alternative treatment
Although severe endometriosis should not be selftreated, many women find they can help their condition through alternative therapies. Taking vitamin B
complex combined with vitamins C, E, and the minerals calcium, magnesium, and selenium can help the
depression and lack of energy that may accompany
endometriosis. B vitamins also counteract the side
effects of hormonal drugs. Other women have found
relief when they turned to a macrobiotic diet. Less
extreme diets that cut out sugar, salt, and processed
foods are sometimes helpful, as well. Mind-body
therapies such as relaxation and visualization help
women cope with pain. Other avenues to combat
pain include acupuncture and biofeedback techniques.
Still other women report positive results after being
treated by chiropractors or homeopathic doctors.
Prognosis
Most women who have endometriosis have minimal symptoms and do well. Overall, endometriosis
symptoms come back in an average of 40% of
women over the five years following treatment. With
hormonal therapy, pain returned after five years in
37% of patients with minimal symptoms and 74% of
those with severe cases. The highest success rate from
conservative treatment followed complete removal of
implants using laser surgery. Eighty percent of these
women were still pain-free five years later. In cases
that don’t respond to these treatments, a woman and
her doctor may consider surgery to remove her reproductive organs.
Prevention
There is no proven way to prevent endometriosis.
One study, however, indicated that girls who begin
participating in aerobic exercise at a young age are
less likely to develop the condition.