Definition
Enterobiasis, or pinworminfection asitis commonly
called, is an intestinal infection caused by the parasitic
roundworm called Enterobius vermicularis. The most
common symptom of this irritating, but not particularly
dangerous, disease isitching around the anal area.
Description
Enterobiasis is also called seatworm infection or
oxyuriasis. In the United States, enterobiasis is the
most common worm infection, and some estimate
that approximately 10% of the United States
population is infected. Worldwide, approximately
200 million people are infected. Enterobiasis can affect
people of any age, but is most common among children ages 5–14 and particularly affects those in the
daycare setting.
Causes and symptoms
The disease is highly contagious and is caused by a
parasitic worm called Enterobius vermicularis. The adult
female worm is about the size of a staple (approximately
0.4 in [1 cm long] and 0.02 in [0.5 mm] wide) and has a
pointed tip. The disease is transmitted by ingesting the
eggs of the pinworm. These eggs travel to the small intestine where, after approximately one month, they hatch
and mature into adult worms. During the night, the
female adult worms travel to the area around the anus
and deposit eggs in the folds of the anal area. A single
female pinworm can lay 10,000 eggs and, after laying
eggs, dies. The eggs are capable of causing infection
after six hours at body temperature.
Significant itching in the anal region is caused by
the movement of the adult worm as the eggs are
deposited. When an individual scratches the anal
region, the tiny eggs get under the finger nails and in
the underwear and night clothes. Anything the individual touches with the contaminated fingers, for example, toys, bedding, blankets, bathroom door knobs, or
sinks, becomes contaminated. The eggs are very hardy
and can live on surfaces for two to three weeks.
Anyone touching these contaminated surfaces can
ingest the eggs and become infected. An individual
can also become infected by inhaling and swallowing
the eggs, for example, when the bedcovers are shaken.
Many individuals with enterobiasis exhibit no
symptoms. When present, however, symptoms of the
infection begin approximately two weeks after ingesting the pinworm eggs. The main symptom is itching
around the anus. Because the itching intensifies at
night, when the female worms comes to the anus to
lay eggs, it often leads to disrupted sleep and irritability. Poor sleeping at night in small children can be
related to pinworms. Occasionally, the itching causes
some bleeding and bruising in the region, and secondary bacterial infections can occur. In females, the itching may spread to the vagina and sometimes causes an
infection of the vaginal region (vaginitis). Enterobiasis
usually lasts one to two months.
Diagnosis
First, a physician will rule out other potential
causes of the itching, such as hemorrhoids, lice, or fungal or bacterial infection. Once these have been
ruled out, an accurate diagnosis of enterobiasis will
require that either the eggs or the adult worms are
detected. Rarely, the adult worms are seen as thin,
yellowish-white threads, about 0.4 in (1 cm) long,
in the stools of the infected person. Usually, an
hour or so after the individual goes to sleep,
the adult female worms may be seen moving
around laying eggs if a flashlight is shone at the
rectal area.
An easier method is to observe the eggs under
the microscope. In order to collect a specimen for
laboratory diagnosis, the physician may provide a
paddle with a sticky adhesive on one side, or an
individual may be instructed to place a piece of
shiny cellophane tape sticky side down against the
anal opening. The best time to perform this test is
at night or as soon as the individual wakes up in
the morning, before having a bowel movement or
taking a bath or shower. The pinworm eggs will
stick to the tape, which can then be placed on a
specimen slide. When under a microscope in the
laboratory, the eggs will be clearly visible.
Treatment
In order to treat the disease, either mebendazole (Vermox) or pyrantel pamoate (Pin-X) will be
given in two oral doses spaced two weeks apart.
These medications eradicate the infection in
approximately 90% of cases. Re-infection is common and several treatments may be required.
Because the infection is easily spread through contact with contaminated clothing or surfaces, it is
recommended that all family members receive the
therapeutic dose. Sometimes a series of six
treatments are given, each spaced two weeks
apart. If family members continue to be infected,
a source outside the house may be responsible.
To relieve the rectal itching, a shallow warm bath
with either half a cup of table salt, or Epsom salts is
recommended. Also, application of an ointment containing zinc oxide or regular petroleum jelly can be
used to relieve rectal itching.
Prognosis
Pinworms cause little damage and can be easily
eradicated with proper treatment. Full recovery is
expected.
Prevention
The disease can be prevented by treating all the
infected cases and thus eliminating the source of
infection. Some ways to keep from catching or
spreading the disease include the following
recommendations:
 wash hands thoroughly before handling food and
eating
 keep finger nails short and clean
 avoiding scratching the anal area
 take early morning showers to wash away eggs
deposited overnight
 once the infection has been identified, and treatment
is started, change the bed linen, night clothes, and
underwear daily
 machine wash linens in hot water and dry with heat
to kill any eggs
 open the blinds or curtains since eggs are sensitive to
sunlight