Definition
An enterostomy is an operation in which the surgeon makes a passage into the patient’s small intestine
through the abdomen with an opening to allow for
drainage or to insert a tube for feeding. The opening is
called a stoma, from the Greek word for mouth.
Enterostomies may be either temporary or permanent.
They are classified according to the part of the intestine that is used to create the stoma. If the ileum, which
is the lowest of the three sections of the small intestine,
is used to make the stoma, the operation is called an
ileostomy. If the jejunum, which is the middle section
of the small intestine, is used, the operation is called a
jejunostomy. Some people use the word ostomy as a
word that covers all types of enterostomies.
Purpose
Enterostomies are performed in order to create a
new opening for the passage of fecal matter when
normal intestinal functioning is interrupted or when
diseases of the intestines cannot be treated by medications or less radical surgery. Some situations that may
require enterostomies include:
 Healing of inflamed bowel segments. Enterostomies
performed for this reason are usually temporary.
 Emergency treatment of gunshot or other penetrating wounds of the abdomen. An enterostomy is
needed to prevent the contents of the intestine from
causing a serious inflammation of the inside of the
abdominal cavity (peritonitis). These enterostomies
are also often temporary.
 Placement of a tube for enteral feeding. Enteral feeding is a method for conveying nutritional solutions
directly into the stomach or jejunum through a tube.
Tube enterostomies may be long-term but are not
permanent.
 Removal of diseased sections of the intestines.
Ileostomies performed for this reason are permanent. The most common disorders requiring permanent ileostomy are Crohn’s disease, familial polyposis,
and ulcerative colitis. Familial polyposis and ulcerative colitis are serious health risks because they can
develop into cancer.
 Treatment of advanced cancer or other causes of
intestinal obstruction.
Precautions
Enterostomies are usually performed only as emergency treatments for traumatic injuries in the abdomen
or as final measures for serious disorders of the intestines. Most patients do not refuse to have the operation
performed when the need for it is explained to them. A
small minority, however, refuse enterostomies because
of strong psychological reactions to personal disfigurement and the need to relearn bowel habits.
Description
Ileostomy
Ileostomies represent about 25% of enterostomies. They are performed after the surgeon removes
a diseased colon and sometimes the rectum as well.
The most common ileostomy is called a Brooke ileostomy after the English surgeon who developed it. In a
Brooke ileostomy, the surgeon makes the stoma in the
lower right section of the abdomen. The ileum is pulled
through an opening (incision) in the muscle layer. The
surgeon then turns the cut end of the intestine inside
out and sews it to the edges of the hole. He or she then
positions an appliance for collecting the fecal material.
The appliance consists of a plastic bag that fits over the
stoma and lies flat against the abdomen. The patient is
taught to drain the bag from time to time during the
day. Ileostomies need to be emptied frequently
because the digested food contains large amounts of
water. Shortly after the operation, the ileostomy produces 1–2 qt.(0.9–1.9 l) of fluid per day; after a month
or two of adjustment, the volume decreases to 1–2 pt
(0.5–0.9) per day.
KOCK POUCH (CONTINENT ILEOSTOMY). The Kock
pouch is a variation of the basic ileostomy and is
named for its Swedish inventor. In the Kock technique, the surgeon forms a pouch inside the abdominal
cavity behind the stoma that collects the fecal material.
The stoma is shaped into a valve to prevent fluid from
leaking onto the patient’s abdomen. The patient then
empties the pouch several times daily by inserting a
tube (catheter) through the valve. The Kock technique is sometimes called a continent ileostomy because the
fluid is contained inside the abdomen. It is successful
in 70–90% of patients who have it done.
Jejunostomy
A jejunostomy is similar to an ileostomy except
that the stoma is placed in the second section of the
small intestine rather than the third. Jejunostomies are
performed less frequently than ileostomies. They are
almost always temporary procedures.
Tube enterostomies
Tube enterostomies are operations in which the
surgeon makes a stoma into the stomach itself or the
jejunum in order to insert a tube for liquid nutrients.
Tube enterostomies are performed in patients who
need tube feeding for longer than six weeks, or who
have had recent mouth or nose surgery. As long as the
patient’s intestinal tract can function, tube feedings
are considered preferable to intravenous feeding.
Enteral nutrition is safer than intravenous fluids and
helps to keep the patient’s digestive tract functioning.
Preparation
Preoperative preparation includes both patient
education and physical preparation.
Patient education
If the patient is going to have a permanent ileostomy, the doctor will explain what will happen during
the operation and why it is necessary. Most patients
are willing to accept an ostomy as an alternative to the
chronic pain and diarrhea of ulcerative colitis or the
risk of cancer from other intestinal disorders. The
patient can also meet with an enterostomal therapist
(ET) or a member of the United Ostomy Association,
which is a support group for people with ostomies.
Medical preparation
The patient is prepared for surgery with an evaluation of his or her nutritional status, possible need
for blood transfusions, and antibiotics if necessary. If
the patient does not have an intestinal obstruction or
severe inflammation, he or she may be given a large
quantity of a polyethylene glycol (PEG) solution to
cleanse the intestines before surgery.
Aftercare
Aftercare of an enterostomy is both psychological
and medical.
Medical aftercare
If the enterostomy is temporary, aftercare consists of the usual monitoring of surgical wounds for
infection or bleeding. If the patient has had a permanent ileostomy, aftercare includes learning to use the
appliance or empty the Kock pouch; learning to keep
the stoma clean; and readjusting bathroom habits.
Recovery takes a long time because major surgery is
a shock to the system and the intestines take several
days to resume normal functioning. The patient’s
fluid intake and output will be checked frequently
to minimize the risk of dehydration.
Patient education
Ileostomy patients must learn to watch their fluid
and salt intake. They are at greater risk of becoming
dehydrated in hot weather, from exercise, or from
diarrhea. In some cases they may need extra bananas
or orange juice in the diet to keep up the level of
potassium in the blood.
Patient education includes social concerns as
well as physical self-care. Many ileostomy patients
are worried about the effects of the operation on
their close relationships and employment. If the
patient has not seen an ET before the operation,
the aftercare period is a good time to find out
about self-help and support groups. The ET can
also evaluate the patient’s emotional reactions to
the ostomy.
Risks
Enterostomies are not considered high-risk operations by themselves. About 40% of ileostomy patients
have complications afterward, however; about 15%
require minor surgical corrections. Possible complications include:
 skin irritation caused by leakage of digestive fluids
onto the skin around the stoma; Irritation is the most
common complication of ileostomies
 diarrhea
 the development of abscesses
 gallstones or stones in the urinary tract
 inflammation of the ileum
 odors can often be prevented by a change in diet
 intestinal obstruction
 a section of the bowel pushing out of the body
(prolapse) Normal results
Normal results include recovery from the surgery
with few or no complications. About 95% of people
with ostomies recover completely, are able to return to
work, and consider themselves to be in good health.
Many ileostomy patients enjoy being able to eat a
full range of foods rather than living on a restricted
diet. Some patients, however, need to be referred to
psychotherapists to deal with depression or other
emotional problems after the operation.