Definition
Enterobacterial infections are disorders of the
digestive tract and other organ systems produced by
a group of gram-negative, rod-shaped bacteria called
Enterobacteriaceae. Gram-negative means that the
organisms do not retain the violet color of the dye
used to make Gram stains. The most troublesome
organism in this group is Escherichia coli. Other
enterobacteria are species of Salmonella, Shigella,
Klebsiella, Enterobacter, Serratia, Proteus, and
Yersinia.
Description
Enterobacterial infections can be produced by
bacteria that normally live in the human digestive
tract without causing serious disease, or by bacteria
that enter from the outside. In many cases these infections are nosocomial, which means that they can be
acquired in the hospital. Klebsiella and Proteus sometimes cause pneumonia, ear and sinus infections, and
urinary tract infections. Enterobacter and Serratia
often cause bacterial infection of the blood (bacteremia), particularly in patients with weakened immune
systems.
Diarrhea caused by enterobacteria is a common
problem in the United States. It is estimated that each
person in the general population has an average of 1.5
episodes of diarrhea each year, with higher rates in
children, institutionalized people, and Native
Americans. This type of enterobacterial infection can
range from a minor nuisance to a life-threatening disorder, especially in infants, elderly persons, AIDS
patients, and malnourished people. Enterobacterial
infections are one of the two leading killers of children
in developing countries.
Causes and symptoms
Causes
Enterobacterial infections in the digestive tract
typically start when the organisms invade the mucous
tissues that line the digestive tract. They may be bacteria that are already present in the stomach and intestines, or they may be transmitted by contaminated
food and water. It is also possible for enterobacterial
infections to spread by person-to-person contact. The
usual incubation period is 12–72 hours.
ESCHERICHIA COLI INFECTIONS. E. coli infections
cause most of the enterobacterial infections in the
United States. The organisms are categorized according to whether they are invasive or noninvasive.
Noninvasive types of E. coli include what are called
enteropathogenic E. coli, or EPEC, and enterotoxigenic E. coli, or ETEC. EPEC and ETEC types produce a bacterial poison (toxin) in the stomach that
interacts with the digestive juices and causes the
patient to lose large amounts of water through the
intestines.
The invasive types of E. coli are called enterohemorrhagic E. coli, or EHEC, and enteroinvasive E.
coli, or EIEC. These subtypes invade the stomach
tissues directly, causing tissue destruction and bloody
stools. EHEC can produce complications leading to
hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS), a potentially fatal
disorder marked by the destruction of red blood cells
and kidney failure. EHEC has become a growing problem in the United States because of outbreaks caused
by contaminated food. A particular type of EHEC
known as O157:H7 has been identified since 1982 in
undercooked hamburgers, unpasteurized milk, and
apple juice. Between 2–7% of infections caused by
O157:H7 develop into HUS.
Symptoms
The symptoms of enterobacterial infections are
sometimes classified according to the type of diarrhea
they produce.
WATERY DIARRHEA. Patients infected with ETEC,
EPEC, some types of Salmonella, and some types of
Shigella develop a watery diarrhea. These infections
are located in the small intestine, result from bacterial
toxins interacting with digestive juices, do not produce
inflammation; and do not usually need treatment with
antibiotics.
BLOODY DIARRHEA (DYSENTERY). Bloody diarrhea
is sometimes called dysentery. It is produced by
EHEC, EIEC, some types of Salmonella, some types
of Shigella, and Yersinia. In dysentery, the infection is
located in the colon, cells and tissues are destroyed,
inflammation is present, and antibiotic therapy is
usually required.
NECROTIZING ENTEROCOLITIS (NEC). Necrotizing
enterocolitis (NEC) is a disorder that begins in newborn infants shortly after birth. Although NEC is not
yet fully understood, it is thought that it results from a
bacterial or viral invasion of damaged intestinal tissues. The disease organisms then cause the death
(necrosis) of bowel tissue or gangrene of the bowel.
NEC is primarily a disease of prematurity; 60–80% of
cases occur in high-risk preterm infants. NEC is
responsible for 2–5% of cases in newborn intensive
care units (NICU). Enterobacteriaceae that have been
identified in infants with NEC include Salmonella, E.
coli, Klebsiella, and Enterobacter.
Diagnosis
Patient history
The diagnosis of enterobacterial infections is complicated by the fact that viruses, protozoa, and other
types of bacteria can also cause diarrhea. In most cases
of mild diarrhea, it is not critical to identify the organism
because the disorder is self-limiting. Some groups of
patients, however, should have stool tests. They include:
 patients with bloody diarrhea,
 patients with watery diarrhea who have become
dehydrated,
 patients with watery diarrhea that has lasted longer
than three days without decreasing in amount,
 patients with disorders of the immune system.
The patient history is useful for public health
reasons as well as helping the doctor determine what
type of enterobacterium may be causing the infection.
The doctor will ask about the frequency and appearance of the diarrhea as well as other digestive symptoms. If the patient is nauseated and vomiting, the
infection is more likely to be located in the small
intestine. If the patient is running a fever, a diagnosis
of dysentery is more likely. The doctor will also ask if
anyone else in the patient’s family or workplace is sick.
Some types of enterobacteriaceae are more likely to
cause group outbreaks than others. Other questions
include the patient’s food intake over the last few days
and whether he or she has recently traveled to countries with typhoid fever or cholera outbreaks.
Physical examination
The most important parts of the physical examination are checking for signs of severe fluid loss and
examining the abdomen to rule out typhoid fever. The
doctor will look at the inside of the patient’s mouth
and evaluate the skin for signs of dehydration. The
presence of a skin rash and an enlarged spleen suggests
typhoid rather than a bacterial infection. If the
patient’s abdomen hurts when the doctor examines
it, a diagnosis of dysentery is more likely.
Laboratory tests
The most common test that is used to identify the
cause of diarrhea is the stool test. Examining a stool
sample under a microscope can help to rule out parasitic and protozoal infections. Routine stool cultures,
however, cannot be used to identify any of the four
types of E. coli that cause intestinal infections. ETEC,
EPEC, and EIEC are unusual in the United States and
can usually be identified only by specialists in research
laboratories. Because of concern about EHEC outbreaks, however, most laboratories in the United
States can now screen for O157:H7 with a test that
identifies its characteristic toxin. All patients with
bloody diarrhea should have a stool sample tested
for E. coli O157:H7.
Treatment
The initial treatment of enterobacterial diarrhea is
usually empiric. Empiric means that the doctor treats
the patient on the basis of the visible symptoms and
professional experience in treating infections, without
waiting for laboratory test results. Since the results of
stool cultures can take as long as two days, it is important to prevent dehydration. The patient will be given
fluids to restore the electrolyte balance and paregoric
to relieve abdominal cramping.
Newborn infants and patients with immune system disorders will be given antibiotics intravenously
once the organism has been identified. Gentamicin,
tobramycin, and amikacin are being used more frequently to treat enterobacterial infections because
many of the organisms are becoming resistant to
ampicillin and cephalosporin antibiotics.
Alternative treatment
Alternative treatments for diarrhea are intended
to relieve the discomfort of abdominal cramping.
Most alternative practitioners advise consulting a
medical doctor if the patient has sunken eyes, dry
eyes or mouth, or other signs of dehydration.
Herbal medicine
Herbalists may recommend cloves taken as an
infusion or ginger given in drop doses to control intestinal cramps, eliminate gas, and prevent vomiting.
Peppermint (Mentha piperita) or chamomile
(Matricaria recutita) tea may also ease cramps and
intestinal spasms.
Homeopathy
Homeopathic practitioners frequently recommend Arsenicum album for diarrhea caused by contaminated food, and Belladonna for diarrhea that
comes on suddenly with mucus in the stools.
Veratrum album would be given for watery diarrhea,
and Podophyllum for diarrhea with few other
symptoms.
Prognosis
The prognosis for most enterobacterial infections
is good; most patients recover in about a week or 10
days without needing antibiotics. HUS, on the other
hand, has a mortality rate of 3–5% even with intensive
care. About a third of the survivors have long-term
problems with kidney function, and another 8% develop high blood pressure, seizure disorders, and
blindness.
Prevention
The World Health Organization (WHO) offers
the following suggestions for preventing enterobacterial infections, including E. coli O157:H7 dysentery:
 Cook ground beef or hamburgers until the meat is
thoroughly done. Juices from the meat should be
completely clear, not pink or red. All parts of the
meat should reach a temperature of 708C (1588F) or
higher.
 Do not drink unpasteurized milk or use products
made from raw milk.
 Wash hands thoroughly and frequently, especially
after using the toilet.
 Wash fruits and vegetables carefully, or peel them.
Keep all kitchen surfaces and serving utensils clean.
 If drinking water is not known to be safe, boil it or
drink bottled water.
 Keep cooked foods separate from raw foods, and
avoid touching cooked foods with knives or other
utensils that have been used with raw meat.