Definition
Epididymitis is inflammation or infection of the
epididymis. In this long coiled tube attached to the
upper part of each testicle, sperm mature and are
stored before ejaculation.
Description
Epididymitis is the most common cause of pain in
the scrotum. The acute form is usually associated with
the most severe pain and swelling. If symptoms last for
more than six weeks after treatment begins, the condition is considered chronic.
Epididymitis can occur any time after the onset of
puberty but is most common between the ages of 18
and 40. It is especially common among members of the
military who exercise for extended periods without
emptying their bladders.
Factors that increase the risk of developing epididymitis include:
 infection of the bladder, kidney, prostate, or urinary
tract
 other recent illness
 narrowing of the urethra (the tube that drains urine
from the bladder)
 use of a urethral catheter
Causes and symptoms
Although epididymitis can be caused by the same
organisms that cause some sexually transmitted
diseases (STDs) or occur after prostate surgery, the
condition is generally due to pus-generating bacteria
associated with infections in other parts of the body.
Epididymitis can also be caused by injury or infection of the scrotum or by irritation from urine that has
accumulated in the vas deferens (the duct through
which sperm travels after leaving the epididymis).
Epididymitis is characterized by sudden redness
and swelling of the scrotum. The affected testicle is
hard and sore, and the other testicle may feel tender.
The patient has chills and fever and usually has acute
urethritis (inflammation of the urethra).
Enlarged lymph nodes in the groin cause scrotal
pain that intensifies throughout the day and may
become so severe that walking normally becomes
impossible.Diagnosis
Laboratory tests used to diagnose epididymitis
include:
 urinalysis and urine culture
 examination of discharges from the urethra and
prostate gland
 blood tests to measure white-cell counts
Treatment
Because epididymitis that affects both testicles
can make a man sterile, antibiotic therapy must be
initiated as soon as symptoms appear. To prevent
reinfection, medication must be taken exactly as prescribed, even if the patient’s symptoms disappear or he
begins to feel better. Over-the-counter anti-inflammatories can relieve pain but should not be used without
the approval of a family physician or urologist.
Bed rest is recommended until symptoms subside,
and patients are advised to wear athletic supporters
when they resume normal activities. If pain is severe, a
local anesthetic like lidocaine (Xylocaine) may be
injected directly into the spermatic cord.
Self-care
A patient who has epididymitis should not drink
beverages that contain caffeine. To prevent constipation, he should use stool softeners or eat plenty of fruit,
nuts, whole grain cereals, and other foods with laxative properties.
An ice bag wrapped in a towel can reduce pain and
swelling but should be removed from the inflamed
area for a few minutes every hour to prevent burns.
Strenuous activity should be avoided until symptoms disappear. Sexual activity should not be resumed
until a month after symptoms disappear.
If a second course of treatment doesn’t eradicate
stubborn symptoms, longterm anti-inflammatory
therapy may be recommended. In rare instances,
chronic symptoms require surgery.
Surgery
Each of the surgical procedures used to treat
epididymitis is performed under local anesthesia on
an outpatient basis. Both of them cause sterility.
Epididymectomy involves removing the inflamed
section of the epididymitis through a small incision in
the scrotum.
Bilateral vasectomy prevents fluid and sperm from
passing through the epididymis. This procedure is
usually performed on men who have chronic epididymitis or on elderly patients undergoing prostate
surgery.
Prognosis
Pain generally subsides 24–72 hours after treatment begins. Complete healing may take weeks or
months.
Prevention
Using condoms and not having sex with anyone
who has an STD can prevent some cases of
epididymitis.t