Definition
Epiglottitis is an infection of the epiglottis, which
can lead to severe airway obstruction.
Description
When air is inhaled (inspired), it passes through
the nose and the nasopharynx or through the mouth
and the oropharynx. These are both connected to the
larynx, a tube made of cartilage. The air continues
down the larynx to the trachea. The trachea then splits
into two branches, the left and right bronchi (bronchial tubes). These bronchi branch into smaller air
tubes that run within the lungs, leading to the small
air sacs of the lungs (alveoli).
Either food, liquid, or air may be taken in through
the mouth. While air goes into the larynx and the
respiratory system, food and liquid are directed into
the tube leading to the stomach, the esophagus.
Because food or liquid in the bronchial tubes or lungs
could cause a blockage or lead to an infection, the
airway is protected. The epiglottis is a leaf-like piece
of cartilage extending upwards from the larynx. The
epiglottis can close down over the larynx when someone is eating or drinking, preventing these food and
liquids from entering the airway.
Epiglottitis is an infection and inflammation of
the epiglottis. Because the epiglottis may swell considerably, there is a danger that the airway will be blocked
off by the very structure designed to protect it. Air is
then unable to reach the lungs. Without intervention,
epiglottitis has the potential to be fatal.
Epiglottitis is primarily a disease of two to sevenyear-old children, although older children and adults
can also contract it. Boys are twice as likely as girls to
develop this infection. Because epiglottitis involves
swelling and infection of tissues, which are all located
at or above the level of the epiglottis, it is sometimes
referred to as supraglottitis (supra, meaning above).
About 25% of all children with this infection also have
pneumonia.
Causes and symptoms
The most common cause of epiglottitis is infection
with the bacteria called Haemophilus influenzae type b.
Other types of bacteria are also occasionally responsible for this infection, including some types of
Streptococcus bacteria and the bacteria responsible
for causing diphtheria.
A patient with epiglottitis typically experiences a
sudden fever, and begins having severe throat and
neck pain. Because the swollen epiglottis interferes
significantly with air movement, every breath creates
a loud, harsh, high-pitched sound referred to as
stridor. Because the vocal cords are located in the
larynx just below the area of the epiglottis, the
swollen epiglottis makes the patient’s voice sound
muffled and strained. Swallowing becomes difficult,
and the patient may drool. The patient often leans
forward and juts out his or her jaw, while struggling
for breath.
Epiglottitis strikes suddenly and progresses
quickly. A child may begin complaining of a sore
throat, and within a few hours be suffering from extremely severe airway obstruction.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis begins with a high level of suspicion
that a quickly progressing illness with fever, sore
throat, and airway obstruction is very likely to be
epiglottitis. If epiglottitis is suspected, no efforts
should be made to look at the throat, or to swab the
throat in order to obtain a culture for identification
of the causative organism. These maneuvers may
cause the larynx to go into spasm (laryngospasm),
completely closing the airway. These procedures
should only be performed in a fully-equipped operating room, so that if laryngospasm occurs, a breathing
tube can be immediately placed in order to keep the
airway open.
An instrument called a laryngoscope is often used
in the operating room to view the epiglottis, which will
appear cherry-red and quite swollen. An x-ray picture
taken from the side of the neck should also be
obtained. The swollen epiglottis has a characteristic
appearance, called the ‘‘thumb sign.’’
Treatment
Treatment almost always involves the immediate
establishment of an artificial airway: inserting a
breathing tube into the throat (intubation); or making
a tiny opening toward the base of the neck and putting
a breathing tube into the trachea (tracheostomy).
Because the patient’s apparent level of distress may
not match the actual severity of the situation, and
because the disease’s progression can be quite surprisingly rapid, it is preferable to go ahead and place the
artificial airway, rather than adopting a wait-and-see
approach.
Because epiglottitis is caused by a bacteria, antibiotics such as cefotaxime, ceftriaxone, or ampicillin
with sulbactam should be given through a needle
placed in a vein (intravenously). This prevents
the bacteria that are circulating throughout the bloodstream from causing infection elsewhere in the body.
Prognosis
With treatment (including the establishment of an
artificial airway), only about 1% of children with
epiglottitis die. Without the artificial airway, this figure jumps to 6%. Most patients recover form the
infection, and can have the breathing tube removed
(extubation) within a few days.
Prevention
Prevention involves the use of a vaccine against
H. influenzae type b (called the Hib vaccine). It is
given to babies at two, four, six, and 15 months.
Use of this vaccine has made epiglottitis a very rare
occurrence.