Definition
Erectile dysfunction (ED), formerly known as
impotence, is the inability to achieve or maintain an
erection long enough to engage in sexual intercourse.
Description
Under normal circumstances, when a man is
sexually stimulated, his brain sends a message down
the spinal cord and into the nerves of the penis. The
nerve endings in the penis release chemical messengers,
called neurotransmitters, that signal the arteries that
supply blood to the corpora cavernosa (the two
spongy rods of tissue that span the length of the
penis) to relax and fill with blood. As they expand,
the corpora cavernosa close off other veins that
would normally drain blood from the penis. As the
penis becomes engorged with blood, it enlarges and
stiffens, causing an erection. Problems with blood
vessels, nerves, or tissues of the penis can interfere
with an erection.
Causes and symptoms
It is estimated that up to 30 million American
men frequently suffer from ED and that it strikes up
to half of all men between the ages of 40 and 70.
Doctors used to think that most cases of ED were
psychological in origin, but they now recognize that,
at least in older men, physical causes may play a
primary role in 60% or more of all cases. In men
over the age of 60, the leading cause is atherosclerosis,
or narrowing of the arteries, which can restrict the
flow of blood to the penis. Injury or disease of the
connective tissue, such as Peyronie’s disease, may
prevent the corpora cavernosa from completely
expanding. Damage to the nerves of the penis from
certain types of surgery or neurological conditions,
such as Parkinson’s disease or multiple sclerosis, may
also cause ED. Men with diabetes are especially at
risk for erectile dysfunction because of their high risk
of both atherosclerosis and a nerve disease called
diabetic neuropathy.
Some drugs, including certain types of blood
pressure medications, antihistamines, tranquilizers
(especially before intercourse), and antidepressants
known as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs, including Prozac and Paxil) can interfere
with erections. Smoking, excessive alcohol consumption, and illicit drug use may also contribute. In some
cases, low levels of the male hormone testosterone may
contribute to erectile failure. Finally, psychological
factors, such as stress, guilt, or anxiety, may also
play a role, even when the ED is primarily due to
organic causes.
Diagnosis
When diagnosing the underlying cause of erectile
dysfunction, the doctor begins by asking the man a
number of questions about when the problem began,
whether it only happens with specific sex partners, and
whether he ever wakes up with an erection. (Men
whose dysfunction occurs only with certain partners
or who wake up with erections are more likely to have
a psychological cause for their ED.) Sometimes, the
man’s sex partner is also interviewed. In some cases,
domestic discord may be a factor.
The doctor also obtains a thorough medical
history to find out about past pelvic surgery, diabetes,
cardiovascular disease, kidney disease, and any
medications the man may be taking. The physical
examination should include a genital examination,
hormone tests, and a glucose test for diabetes.
Sometimes a measurement of blood flow through the
penis may be taken.
Treatment
Years ago, the standard treatment for erectile
dysfunction was a penile implant or long-term psychotherapy. Although physical causes are now more
readily diagnosed and treated, individual or marital
counseling is still an effective treatment for ED when
emotional factors play a role.
There are three prescription medications available in the United States to treat the physical causes
of ED: sildenafil citrate (Viagra), vardenafil
(Levitra), and tadalafil (Cialis). They help about
three-fourths of all men who try them in the general
population. Several studies have indicated that their
success rate in diabetic men may be slightly lower,
averaging around 60–65%. All three pills work by
enhancing the effects of nitric oxide. This chemical
relaxes muscles in the penis to allow more blood
to flow in. These pills do not cause an erection by
themselves. Sexual stimulation is also required.
Sildenafil or vardenafil should be taken about an
hour before sex. Each is effective for roughly four
hours. Tadalafil lasts for up to 36 hours. Men should
not have sex more than once every 24 hours after
using these drugs. Before Viagra’s approval in 1998,
drug treatment of erectile dysfunction was limited to
alprostadil (prostaglandin [E.sub.1]), either injected
into the penis or inserted as a pellet into the
urethra. Sales of the three newer ED drugs reached
$3.4 billion in 2004, according to the research firm
IMS Health. In 2004, Viagra had about 66% of the
market share for ED drugs compared to 19% for
Levitra and 14% for Cialis.
Viagra
Sildenafil citrate was originally developed in
1991 as a treatment for angina, or chest pain. The
drug, marketed under the name Viagra, received
FDA approval as a treatment for erectile dysfunction in March 1998, and since that time it has been
prescribed for more then 20 million men worldwide.
It was the first oral medication approved for
ED treatment. Viagra is a vasodilator, a drug that
has the effect of dilating the blood vessels. It works
by improving blood circulation to the penis, and
by enhancing the effects of nitric oxide, the agent
that relaxes the smooth muscle of the penis and
regulates blood vessels during sexual stimulation,
allowing the penis to become engorged and achieve
an erection.
The average recommended dose of Viagra is 50
mg. It comes in doses of 25 mg., 50 mg., and 100 mg to.
The medication is taken approximately one hour
before sexual activity is planned, and may remain
effective for up to four hours. One drawback is that
to be effective, it should be taken on an empty
stomach. Also, high-fat foods can interfere with the
absorption of Viagra. Viagra does not increase sexual
desire. Sexual stimulation and arousal are required for
it to be effective.
Many insurance plans cover the cost of Viagra,
provided it is prescribed to treat erectile dysfunction.
The pills cost approximately $10 each, and insurers
may limit coverage to a specific number of pills each
month.
The primary drawback to Viagra, which works
about an hour after it is taken, it that the FDA
cautions men with heart disease or low blood pressure
to be thoroughly examined by a physician before
obtaining a prescription. At least 130 men have died
while taking Viagra. However, the FDA said the
men—most over the age of 64—died of heart attack
or stroke due to health problems exaggerated by
sexual activity, not the drug itself.
Levitra
In early 2003, a second prescription drug to treat
erectile dysfunction, Levitra, was approved by the
FDA. Like Viagra, Levitra helps increase blood flow
to the penis and may help men with ED get and keep
an erection. Once a man has completed sexual activity,
blood flow to the penis should decrease and the
erection should go away. Levitra should be taken
approximately 60 minutes prior to sexual activity. In
clinical trials, most patients were able to begin sexual
activity before that time. A 2004 study showed that
about 50% of men taking Levitra experienced a firm
erection within 25 minutes and a small percentage in as
quickly as 10 minutes. Studies also showed that
Levitra improved erectile function in men who had
other health factors, such as diabetes or prostate
surgery.
Men taking nitrate drugs, often used to control
chest pain (also known as angina), should not take
Levitra. Men who use alpha-blockers, sometimes prescribed for high blood pressure or prostate problems,
also should not take Levitra. Such combinations could
cause blood pressure to drop to an unsafe level.
Levitra is available in 2.5 mg, 5 mg, 10 mg, and 20
mg tablets and should be taken no more than once a
day. The average cost per pill is about $10 and is
covered by many insurance plans.
Cialis
Cialis is the third oral drug prescribed to treat
erectile dysfunction, approved by the FDA in
November 2003. Its most notable difference from
Viagra and Levitra, which work for about four
hours, is that Cialis works for up to 36 hours. Cialis
helps increase blood flow in the penis when a man is
sexually stimulated. It can help men with ED get and
keep an erection satisfactory for sexual activity. Once
a man has completed sexual activity, blood flow to his
penis decreases, and his erection goes away. Cialis is
clinically proven to improve erectile function in most
men with ED, including those with mild, moderate or
severe ED.
The most common side effects with Cialis are
headache, upset stomach, back pain, and muscle
aches. These side effects usually go away after a few
hours. Patients who get back pain and muscle aches
usually get it 12 to 24 hours after taking Cialis. Back
pain and muscle aches usually go away by themselves
within 48 hours.
Cialis comes in 5 mg., 10 mg. (the recommended
starting dose), and 20 mg. tablets. The average cost
per tablet is about $10 and it is covered by many
insurance plans. Since the absorption of Cialis is
not affected by food or high-fat foods, it does not
need to be taken on an empty stomach. Studies
show that in most men, Cialis begins working in
about 30 minutes and may be taken up to once per
day by most patients.
Priapism, a prolonged erection, is a very rare
potential side effect of all prescription ED medications. Persons taking Viagra, Levitra, or Cialis who
have a prolonged erection, lasting more than four
hours, should seek immediate medical attention.
Priapism can cause damage to the penis potentially
leading to the permanent inability to have an erection.
Because sexual activity can stress the heart, men
who have heart problems should check with their
physician to see if sexual activity is recommended.
Erectile dysfunction drugs may trigger temporary
hypotension (low blood pressure) and is known to
increase cardiovascular nerve activity, so physicians
should prescribe them with caution in men with a
history of heart attack, atherosclerosis (hardening of
the arteries), angina, arrhythmia, and chronic low
blood pressure problems. ED drugs are not labeled
or approved for use by women or children, or by
men without erectile dysfunction. Anyone experiencing cardiovascular symptoms such as dizziness,
chest or arm pain, and nausea when participating in
sexual activity after taking an ED medication should
stop the encounter. They should also not take any
ED drug again until they have discussed the episode
with their healthcare provider. It is recommended
that men with kidney or liver impairments, and men
over age 65, start at the lowest possible dosage of ED
medications.
Other treatment options
Although the commercial availability of Viagra,
Levitra, and Cialis has been useful in many men, prostate cancer patients and ED caused by psychological
problems often require alternative treatment. A commonly used alternative consists of a three-drug injection containing alprostadil, papaverine hydrochloride,
and phentolamine mesylate. Though it is commonly
referred to as the ‘‘Knoxville formula,’’ apparently for
the city of its original introduction, a number of
slightly varying formulas have been in use around
the country. The three-drug preparation is administered by injection into the corpora cavernosa to induce
erection.
Other traditional therapies for ED include
vacuum pump therapy, injection therapy involving
injecting a substance into the penis to enhance blood
flow, and a penile implantation device. In rare cases, if
narrowed or diseased veins are responsible for ED,
surgeons may reroute the blood flow into the corpora
cavernosa or remove leaking vessels.
In vacuum pump therapy, a man inserts his penis
into a clear plastic cylinder and uses a pump to force
air out of the cylinder. This forms a partial vacuum
around the penis, which helps to draw blood into
the corpora cavernosa. The man then places a special
ring over the base of the penis to trap the blood
inside it. The only side effect with this type of treatment is occasional bruising if the vacuum is left on
too long.
Injection therapy involves injecting a substance
into the penis to enhance blood flow and cause an
erection. The FDA approved a drug called alprostadil
(Caverject) for this purpose in 1995. Alprostadil
relaxes smooth muscle tissue to enhance blood flow
into the penis. It must be injected shortly before intercourse. Another, similar drug that is sometimes used is
papaverine. Either drug may sometimes cause painful
erections or priapism that must be treated with a shot
of epinephrine. Alprostadil may also be administered
into the urethral opening of the penis. In MUSE
(medical urethral system for erection), the man inserts
a thin tube the width of a spaghetti noodle into his
urethral opening and presses down on a plunger to
deliver a tiny pellet containing alprostadil into his
penis. The drug takes about 10 minutes to work and
the erection lasts about an hour. The main side effect is
a sensation of pain and burning in the urethra, which
can last about five to 15 minutes. The injection process
itself is often painful
Implantable penile prostheses are usually considered a last resort for treating erectile dysfunction.
They are implanted in the corpora cavernosa to
make the penis rigid without the need for blood flow.
The semi-rigid type of prosthesis consists of a pair of
flexible silicone rods that can be bent up or down. This
type of device has a low failure rate but, unfortunately,
it causes the penis to always be erect, which can be
difficult to conceal under clothing.
The inflatable type of device consists of cylinders
that are implanted in the corpora cavernosa, a fluid
reservoir implanted in the abdomen, and a pump
placed in the scrotum. The man squeezes the pump
to move fluid into the cylinders and cause them to
become rigid. (He reverses the process by squeezing
the pump again.) While these devices allow for intermittent erections, they have a slightly higher malfunction rate than the silicon rods. Men can return to
sexual activity six to eight weeks after implantation
surgery. Since implants affect the corpora cavernosa,they permanently take away a man’s ability to have a
natural erection.
Alternative treatment
A number of herbs have been promoted for
treating erectile dysfunction. The most widely touted
is yohimbe (Corynanthe yohimbe), derived from
the bark of the yohimbe tree native to West Africa.
It has been used in Europe for about 75 years to treat
ED. The FDA approved yohimbe as a treatment
for ED in the late 1980s. It is sold as an over-thecounter dietary supplement and as a prescription
drug under brand names such as Yocon,
Aphrodyne, Erex, Yohimex, Testomar, Yohimbe,
and Yovital.
There is no clear medical research that indicates
exactly how or why yohimbe works in treating ED. It
is generally believed that yohimbe dilates blood vessels and stimulates blood flow to the penis, causing an
erection. It also prevents blood from flowing out of
the penis during an erection. It may also act on the
central nervous system, specifically the lower spinal
cord area where sexual signals are transmitted.
Studies show it is effective to some degree in 30–
40% of men with ED. It is primarily effective in
men with ED caused by vascular, psychogenic (originating in the mind), or diabetic problems. It usually
does not work in men whose dysfunction is caused by
organic nerve damage. In healthy men without ED,
yohimbe in some cases appears to increase sexual
stamina and prolong erections. The usual dosage of
yohimbine (yohimbe extract) to treat ED is 5.4 mg
three times a day. It may take three to six weeks for it
to take effect.
Ginkgo Ginkgo biloba, is also used to treat erectile
dysfunction, although it has not been shown to help
the condition in controlled studies, and probably has
more of a psychological effect. In addition, ginkgo
carries some risk of abnormal blood clotting and
should be avoided by men taking blood thinners,
such as coumadin. Other herbs promoted for treating
ED include true unicorn root Aletrius farinosa, saw
palmettoSerenoa repens, ginseng Panax ginseng, and
Siberian ginseng Eleuthrococcus senticosus. Nux
vomica Strychnos nux-vomica has been recommended,
especially when ED is caused by excessive alcohol,
cigarettes, or dietary indiscretions. Nux vomica can
be very toxic if taken improperly, so it should be used
only under the strict supervision of a physician trained
in its use.
There are quite a few Chinese herbal remedies
for erectile dysfunction usually combinations of
herbs and sometimes animal parts such as deer
antler and sea horse. Acupuncture is also used to
treat ED, although Western doctors question its
effectiveness.
Prognosis
With proper diagnosis, erectile dysfunction
can nearly always be treated or coped with successfully. Unfortunately, fewer than 10% of men with
ED seek treatment. However, with the heavy advertising and marketing associated with Viagra,Levitra, and Cialis, this number is expected to rise
dramatically.
Prevention
There is no specific treatment to prevent erectile
dysfunction. Perhaps the most important measure is
to maintain general good health and avoid atherosclerosis by exercising regularly, controlling weight,
controlling hypertension and high cholesterol levels,
and not smoking. Avoiding excessive alcohol intake
may also help.