Definition
Erythroblastosis fetalis refers to two potentially
disabling or fatal blood disorders in infants: Rh
incompatibility disease and ABO incompatibility disease. Either disease may be apparent before birth and
can cause fetal death in some cases. The disorder is
caused by incompatibility between a mother’s blood
and her unborn baby’s blood. Because of the incompatibility, the mother’s immune system may launch an
immune response against the baby’s red blood cells.
As a result, the baby’s blood cells are destroyed, and
the baby may suffer severe anemia (deficiency in red
blood cells), brain damage, or death.
Description
Red blood cells carry several types of proteins,
called antigens, on their surfaces. The A, B, and O
antigens are used to classify a person’s blood as type
A, B, AB, or O. Each parent passes one A, B, or O
antigen gene to their child. How the genes are paired
determines the person’s blood type.
A person who inherits an A antigen gene from
each parent has type A blood; receiving two B antigen
genes corresponds with type B blood; and inheriting A
and B antigen genes means a person has type AB
blood. If the O antigen gene is inherited from both
parents, the child has type O blood; however, the
pairing of A and O antigen genes corresponds with
type A blood; and if the B antigen gene is matched
with the O antigen gene, the person has type B blood.
Another red blood cell antigen, called the Rh
factor, also plays a role in describing a person’s
blood type. A person with at least one copy of the
gene for the Rh factor has Rh-positive blood; if no
copies are inherited, the person’s blood type is
Rh-negative. In blood typing, the presence of A, B,
and O antigens, plus the presence or absence of the
Rh-factor, determine a person’s specific blood type,
such as A-positive, B-negative, and so on.
A person’s blood type has no effect on health.
However, an individual’s immune system considers
only that person’s specific blood type, or a close
match, acceptable. If a radically different blood type
is introduced into the bloodstream, the immune system produces antibodies, proteins that specifically
attack and destroy any cell carrying the foreign
antigen.
Determining a person’s blood type is very important if she becomes pregnant. Blood cells from the
unborn baby (fetal red blood cells) can cross over
into the mother’s bloodstream, especially at delivery.
If the mother and her baby have compatible blood
types, the crossover does not present any danger.
However, if the blood types are incompatible, the
mother’s immune system manufactures antibodies
against the baby’s blood.
Usually, this incompatibility is not a factor in a
first pregnancy, because few fetal blood cells reach the
mother’s bloodstream until delivery. The antibodies
that form after delivery cannot affect the first child. In
later pregnancies, fetuses and babies may be in grave
danger. The danger arises from the possibility that the
mother’s antibodies will attack the fetal red blood
cells. If this happens, the fetus or baby can suffer
severe health effects and may die.
There are two types of incompatibility diseases:
Rh incompatibility disease and ABO incompatibility
disease. Both diseases have similar symptoms, but Rh
disease is much more severe, because anti-Rh antibodies cross over the placenta more readily than anti-A
or anti-B antibodies. (The immune system does not
form antibodies against the O antigen.) Therefore, a
greater percentage of the baby’s blood cells are
destroyed by Rh disease.
Both incompatibility diseases are uncommon in
the United States due to medical advances over the last
50 years. For example, prior to 1946 (when newborn
blood transfusions were introduced) 20,000 babies
were affected by Rh disease yearly. Further advances,
such as suppressing the mother’s antibody response,
have reduced the incidence of Rh disease to approximately 4,000 cases per year.
Rh disease only occurs if a mother is Rh-negative
and her baby is Rh-positive. For this situation to
occur, the baby must inherit the Rh factor gene from
the father. Most people are Rh-positive. Only 15% of
the Caucasian population is Rh-negative, compared to
5–7% of the African-American population and virtually none of Asian populations.
ABO incompatibility disease is almost always limited to babies with A or B antigens whose mothers
have type O blood. Approximately one third of these
babies show evidence of the mother’s antibodies in
their bloodstream, but only a small percentage
develop symptoms of ABO incompatibility disease.
Cause and symptoms
Rh disease and ABO incompatibility disease are
caused when a mother’s immune system produces
antibodies against the red blood cells of her unborn
child. The antibodies cause the baby’s red blood cells
to be destroyed and the baby develops anemia. The
baby’s body tries to compensate for the anemia by
releasing immature red blood cells, called erythroblasts, from the bone marrow.
The overproduction of erythroblasts can cause the
liver and spleen to become enlarged, potentially causing liver damage or a ruptured spleen. The emphasis
on erythroblast production is at the cost of producing
other types of blood cells, such as platelets and other
factors important for blood clotting. Since the blood
lacks clotting factors, excessive bleeding can be a
complication.
The destroyed red blood cells release the blood’s
red pigment (hemoglobin) which degrades into a yellow substance called bilirubin. Bilirubin is normally
produced as red blood cells die, but the body is only
equipped to handle a certain low level of bilirubin in
the bloodstream at one time. Erythroblastosis fetalis
overwhelms the removal system, and high levels of
bilirubin accumulate, causing hyperbilirubinemia, a
condition in which the baby becomes jaundiced. The
jaundice is apparent from the yellowish tone of the
baby’s eyes and skin. If hyperbilirubinemia cannot be
controlled, the baby develops kernicterus. The term
kernicterus means that bilirubin is being deposited in
the brain, possibly causing permanent damage.
Other symptoms that may be present include high
levels of insulin and low blood sugar, as well as a
condition called hydrops fetalis. Hydrops fetalis is
characterized by an accumulation of fluids within the
baby’s body, giving it a swollen appearance. This fluid
accumulation inhibits normal breathing, because the
lungs cannot expand fully and may contain fluid. If
this condition continues for an extended period, it can
interfere with lung growth. Hydrops fetalis and anemia can also contribute to heart problems.
Diagnosis
Erythroblastosis fetalis can be predicted before
birth by determining the mother’s blood type. If she
is Rh-negative, the father’s blood is tested to determine whether he is Rh-positive. If the father is
Rh-positive, the mother’s blood will be checked for
antibodies against the Rh factor. A test that demonstrates no antibodies is repeated at week 26 or 27 of the
pregnancy. If antibodies are present, treatment is
begun.
In cases in which incompatibility is not identified
before birth, the baby suffers recognizable characteristic symptoms such as anemia, hyperbilirubinemia,
and hydrops fetalis. The blood incompatibility is
uncovered through blood tests such as the Coombs
test, which measures the level of maternal antibodies
attached to the baby’s red blood cells. Other blood
tests reveal anemia, abnormal blood counts, and high
levels of bilirubin.
Treatment
When a mother has antibodies against her unborn
infant’s blood, the pregnancy is watched very carefully. The antibodies are monitored and if levels
increase, amniocentesis, fetal umbilical cord blood
sampling, and ultrasound are used to assess any effects
on the baby. Trouble is indicated by high levels of
bilirubin in the amniotic fluid or baby’s blood, or if
the ultrasound reveals hydrops fetalis. If the baby is in
danger, and the pregnancy is at least 32–34 weeks
along, labor is induced. Under 32 weeks, the baby is
given blood transfusions while still in the mother’s
uterus.
There are two techniques that are used to deliver a
blood transfusion to a baby before birth. In the first, a
needle is inserted through the mother’s abdomen and
uterus, and into the baby’s abdomen. Red blood cells
injected into the baby’s abdominal cavity are absorbed
into its bloodstream. In early pregnancy or if the
baby’s bilirubin levels are gravely high, cordocentesis
is performed. This procedure involves sliding a very
fine needle through the mother’s abdomen and, guided
by ultrasound, into a vein in the umbilical cord to
inject red blood cells directly into the baby’s
bloodstream.
After birth, the severity of the baby’s symptoms
are assessed. One or more transfusions may be necessary to treat anemia, hyperbilirubinemia, and bleeding. Hyperbilirubinemia is also treated with
phototherapy, a treatment in which the baby is placed
under a special light. This light causes changes in how
the bilirubin molecule is shaped, which makes it easier
to excrete. The baby may also receive oxygen and
intravenous fluids containing electrolytes or drugs to
treat other symptoms.
Prognosis
In many cases of blood type incompatibility, the
symptoms of erythroblastosis fetalis are prevented
with careful monitoring and blood type screening.
Treatment of minor symptoms is typically successful
and the baby will not suffer long-term problems.
Nevertheless, erythroblastosis is a very serious
condition for approximately 4,000 babies annually.
In about 15% of cases, the baby is severely affected
and dies before birth. Babies who survive pregnancy
may develop kernicterus, which can lead to deafness,
speech problems, cerebral palsy, or mental retardation. Extended hydrops fetalis can inhibit lung growth
and contribute to heart failure. These serious complications are life threatening, but with good medical
treatment, the fatality rate is very low. According to
the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
there were 21 infant deaths in the United States during
1996 that were attributable to hemolytic disease (erythroblastosis fetalis) and jaundice.
Prevention
With any pregnancy, whether it results in a live
birth, miscarriage, stillbirth, or abortion, blood typing
is a universal precaution against blood compatibility
disease. Blood types cannot be changed, but adequate
forewarning allows precautions and treatments that
limit the danger to unborn babies.
If an Rh-negative woman gives birth to an
Rh-positive baby, she is given an injection of immunoglobulin G, a type of antibody protein, within
72 hours of the birth. The immunoglobulin destroys
any fetal blood cells in her bloodstream before her
immune system can react to them. In cases where this
precaution is not taken, antibodies are created and
future pregnancies may be complicated.