Definition
Erythromycins are medicines that kill bacteria or
prevent their growth.
Purpose
Erythromycins are antibiotics, medicines used to
treat infections caused by microorganisms. Physicians
prescribe these drugs for many types of infections
caused by bacteria, including strep throat, sinus infections, pneumonia, ear infections, tonsillitis, bronchitis,
gonorrhea, pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), and
urinary tract infections. Some medicines in this
group are also used to treat Legionnaires’ disease and
ulcers caused by bacteria. These drugs will not work
for colds, flu, and other infections caused by viruses.
Description
The drugs described here include erythromycins
(Erythrocin, Ery-C, E-Mycin, and other brands) and
medicines that are chemically related to erythromycins, such as azithromycin (Zithromax) and clarithromycin (Biaxin). They are available only with a
physician’s prescription and are sold in capsule, tablet
(regular and chewable), liquid, and injectable forms.
Recommended dosage
The recommended dosage depends on the type of
erythromycin, the strength of the medicine, and the
medical problem for which it is being taken. Check
with the physician who prescribed the drug or the pharmacist who filled the prescription for the correct dosage.
Always take erythromycins exactly as directed.
Never take larger, smaller, more frequent, or less frequent doses. To make sure the infection clears up
completely, it is very important to take the medicine
for as long as it has been prescribed. Do not stop
taking the drug just because symptoms begin to
improve. This is important with all types of infections,
but it is especially important in ‘‘strep’’ infections,
which can lead to serious heart problems if they are
not cleared up completely.
Erythromycins work best when they are at constant levels in the blood. To help keep levels constant,
take the medicine in doses spaced evenly through the
day and night. Do not miss any doses. Some of these
medicines are most effective when taken with a full
glass of water on an empty stomach, but they may be
taken with food if stomach upset is a problem. Others
work equally well when taken with or without food.
Check package directions or ask the physician or
pharmacist for instructions on how to take the
medicine.
Precautions
Symptoms should begin to improve within a few
days of beginning to take this medicine. If they do not,
or if they get worse, check with the physician who
prescribed the medicine.
Erythromycins may cause mild diarrhea, that
usually goes away during treatment. However, severe
diarrhea could be a sign of a very serious side effect.
Anyone who develops severe diarrhea while taking
erythromycin or related drugs should stop taking the
medicine and call a physician immediately.
Special conditions
Taking erythromycins may cause problems for
people with certain medical conditions or people who
are taking certain other medicines. Before taking these
drugs, be sure to let the physician know about any of
these conditions:
 ALLERGIES. Anyone who has had unusual reactions to erythromycins, azithromycin, or clarithromycin in the past should let his or her physician know
before taking the drugs again. The physician should
also be told about any allergies to foods, dyes, preservatives, or other substances.
 PREGNANCY. Some medicines in this group may
cause problems in pregnant women and have the
potential to cause birth defects. Women who are pregnant or who may become pregnant should check with
their physicians before taking these drugs.
 BREASTFEEDING. Erythromycins pass into breast
milk. Mothers who are breastfeeding and who need
to take this medicine should check with their
physicians.
OTHER MEDICAL CONDITIONS. Before using erythromycins, people with any of these medical problems should make sure their physicians are aware of
their conditions:
 heart disease
 liver disease
 hearing loss
USE OF CERTAIN MEDICINES. Taking erythromycins with certain other drugs may affect the way the
drugs work or may increase the chance of side effects.
Side effects
The most common side effects are mild diarrhea,
nausea, vomiting, and stomach or abdominal cramps.
These problems usually go away as the body adjusts to
the drug and do not require medical treatment. Less
common side effects, such as sore mouth or tongue
and vaginal itching and discharge also may occur and
do not need medical attention unless they persist or are
bothersome.
More serious side effects are not common, but
may occur. If any of the following side effects occur,
check with a physician immediately:
 severe stomach pain, nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea
 fever
 skin rash, redness, or itching
 unusual tiredness or weakness
Although rare, very serious reactions to azithromycin (Zithromax) are possible, including extreme
swelling of the lips, face, and neck, and anaphylaxis
(a violent allergic reaction). Anyone who develops
these symptoms after taking azithromycin should
stop taking the medicine and get immediate medical
help.
Other rare side effects may occur with erythromycins and related drugs. Anyone who has unusual
symptoms after taking these medicines should get in
touch with his or her physician.
Interactions
Erythromycins may interact with many other
medicines. When this happens, the effects of one or
both of the drugs may change or the risk of side effects
may be greater. Anyone who takes erythromycins
should let the physician know all other medicines he
or she is taking. Among the drugs that may interact
with erythromycins are:
 acetaminophen (Tylenol)
 medicine for overactive thyroid
 male hormones (androgens)
 female hormones (estrogens)
 other antibiotics
 blood thinners
 disulfiram (Antabuse), used to treat alcohol abuse
 antiseizure medicines such as valproic acid
(Depakote, Depakene)
 caffeine
 the antihistamines astemizole (Hismanal)
 antiviral drugs such as (zidovudine) Retrovir
The list above does not include every drug that
may interact with erythromycins. Be sure to check
with a physician or pharmacist before combining erythromycins with any other prescription or nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicine.