Definition
 E. coli (Escherichia coli) is one of several types of
bacteria that normally inhabit the intestine of humans
and animals (commensal organism). Some strains of
 E. coli are capable of causing disease under certain
conditions when the immune system is compromised
or disease may result from an environmental exposure.
Description
 E. coli bacteria may give rise to infections in
wounds, the urinary tract, biliary tract, and abdominal
cavity (peritonitis). This organism may cause septicemia, neonatal meningitis, infantile gastroenteritis,
tourist diarrhea, and hemorrhagic diarrhea. An
 E. coli infection may also arise due to environmental
exposure. Infections with this type of bacteria pose a
serious threat to public health with outbreaks arising
from food and water that has been contaminated with
human or animal feces or sewage. This type of bacteria
has been used as a biological indicator for safety of
drinking water since the 1890s. Exposure may also
occur during hospitalization, resulting in pneumonia
in immunocompromised patients or those on a
ventilator
Causes and symptoms
The symptoms of infection and resulting complications are dependent upon the strain of E. coli and the
site of infection. These bacteria produce toxins that
have a wide range of effects. Symptoms caused by
some E. coli infections range from mild to severe,
bloody diarrhea, acute abdominal pain, vomiting, and
fever. Gastrointestinal complications that can cause
 E. coli infections include irritable bowel syndrome
(IBS) ischemic colitis, appendicitis, perforation of the
large bowel, and in some instances gangrene in the
colon. Other known E. coli-causing infections may
include chronic renal failure, pancreatitis, and diabetes
mellitus. Some neurological symptoms such as drowsiness, seizure and coma may occur. In infants, E. coli
infections are present in cases of infantile gastroenteritis and neonatal meningitis.
Strains of E. coli that produce diarrhea were initially distinguished by their O (somatic) antigens found
on the bacterial surface. Although there is an overlap
in characteristics between strains, they may be classified into four main groups; enterohemorrahagic
(0157),enteropathogenic (055,0111), enterotoxigenic
(06,078), and enteroinvasive (0124,0164).
E.coli O157 (VTEC)
The O157:H7 strain is the member of the group
most often associated with a particularly severe form
of diarrhea. (The O indicates the somatic antigen,
while the H denotes the flagellar antigen, both of
which are found on the cell surface of the bacteria.)
The bacterium was discovered in 1977, and first
reports of infections followed in 1982. E. coli
O157:H7, as it is frequently referred to by researchers,
causes bloody diarrhea in many infected patients. It
accounts for about 2% of all cases of diarrhea in the
western world, and at least one-third of cases of
hemorrhagic colitis, or about 20,000 cases per year
 E. coli O157:H7 is also the most common cause of
unique syndromes, known as the Hemolytic-Uremic
Syndrome (HUS) and thrombocytopenic purpura
(TTP), which causes kidney failure, hemolytic anemia,
and thrombocytopenia. Usually, infection with this
strain of bacteria will subside without further
complications. However, about 5% of people who are
infected will develop HUS/TTP. This infection also
accounts for the majority of episodes of HUS, especially in children.
This strain of bacteria produces a potent toxin
called verotoxin, named for toxin’s ability to kill
green monkey kidney or ‘‘vero’’ cells. Bacteria that
produce verotoxin are referred to as Verotoxin-producing E. coli (VTEC). The numbers of bacteria that
are necessary to reproduce infectious levels of bacteria are quite small, estimated at 10-100 viable bacteria. These toxins are lethal for intestinal cells and
those that line vessels (endothelial cells), inhibiting
protein synthesis causing cell death. It is believed
that the damage to blood vessels results in the formation of clots, which eventually leads to the
Hemolytic-Uremic Syndrome. HUS/TTP is a serious, often fatal, syndrome that has other causes in
addition to E. coli O157:H7; it is characterized by the
breaking up of red blood cells (hemolysis) and kidney failure (uremia). The syndrome occurs most
often in the very young and very old.
 E. coli O157:H7 is commonly found in cattle and
poultry, and outbreaks have of disease have been
associated with cattle and bovine products. There are
reports of contamination from unpasteurized apple
juice, hamburger meat, radish sprouts, lettuce, and
potatoes, as well as other food sources. Environmental
contamination may occur in water drained from cattle
pastures or water containing human sewage used for
drinking or swimming. Human to human transmission,
through contact with fecal matter, has also been identified in daycare centers.
After an incubation period of three to four days on
average, watery diarrhea begins, which rapidly progresses to bloody diarrhea in many victims, in which
case the bowel movement may be mostly blood.
Nausea, vomiting, and low-grade fever are also frequently present. Gastrointestinal symptoms last for
about one week, and recovery is often spontaneous.
Symptomatic infection may occur in about 10% of
infected individuals. About 5-10% of individuals,
usually at the extremes of age or elevated leukocyte
count, develop HUS/TTP, and ultimately, kidney failure. Patients taking antibiotics or medications for gastric acidity may also be at risk. Neurological symptoms
can also occur as part of HUS/TTP and consist of
seizures, paralysis, and coma. Rectal prolapse may
also be a complication, and in some cases colitis,
appendicitis, perforation of the large bowel, and gangrene in the bowel. Systemically, the most prevalent
complications of E. coli 157 infections are HUS
and TTP.
 E. coli non-O157 (VTEC)
These strains of E. coli produce verotoxin, but are
strains other than O157. There have been as many as
one hundred different types implicated in the development of disease. Strain OH111 was found to be
involved in outbreaks in Australia, Japan, and Italy.
The O128, O103, and O55 groups have also been
implicated in diarrhea outbreaks. In Britain, cases of
infantile gastroenteritis in maternity hospitals and
neonatal units have been attributed to the E. coli
non-0157 group. Many of these organisms have been
identified in cattle.
Enterotoxigenic E. coli
Two toxins may be produced by this group, the
heat-labile enterotoxin (LT) that can produce enteritis
in infants, and a heat stable enterotoxin (ST), the
action of which has yet to be determined.
Enteroinvasive E. coli
Some strains of the enteroinvasive E. coli have
been involved in the development of gastroenteritis
in infants. These organisms do not produce and enterotoxin. The cells of the intestine are affected, with the
development of symptoms that are typical of a shigellae infection.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of a specific type of infection is dependant upon the characteristics of the particular strain of
the organism.
 E. coli O157:H7 (HUS)
This particular strain of E. coli is suspected when
bloody diarrhea, bloody stools, lack of fever, elevated
leukocyte count, and abdominal tenderness are present. Stool cultures are used to tentatively identify the
bacteria. Unfortunately, cultures are often negative or
inconclusive if done after 48 hours of symptoms.
Further tests are usually needed, however, for confirmation of infection. This may include a full blood
count, blood film, and tests to determine urea, electrolyte, and LDH (lactate dehydrogenase) levels.
Damaged red blood cells, and elevated levels of creatinine, urea, and LDH with a drop in platelet count may
indicate that HUS will develop. Immunomagnetic
separation is now being used for diagnosis as well.
 E. coli non-O157 (VTEC)
Diagnosis is often difficult for these types of bacteria, but production of enterohemolysin (Ehly) is
used as an indicator. Other diagnostic tests are used
to detect verotoxins, including ELISA (enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assays), colony immunoblotting, and
DNA-based tests.
 E. coli 0157 STEC
Methods for detection of this type of bacteria are
under development, including culture growth media
selective for this organism. Immunomagnetic separation and specific ELISA, latex agglutination tests,
colony immunoblot assays, and other immunological-based detection methods are being explored.
Treatment
Uncomplicated cases of the E. coli O157:H7 the
infection clear up within ten days. It is not certain that
antibiotics are helpful in treating E. coli O157:H7 and
there is some evidence that they may be harmful.
Dehydration resulting from diarrhea must be treated
with either Oral Rehydration Solution (ORS) or intravenous fluids. Anti-motility agents that decrease the
intestines’ ability to contract, should not be used in
any patient with bloody diarrhea. Treatment of HUS,
if it develops, involves correction of clotting factors,
plasma exchange, and kidney dialysis. Blood transfusions may be required. Treatment methods for other
 E. coli infections are similar. Antibiotics are often used
in the treatment of E. coli infections, but their role is
controversial. Some antibiotics may enhance the
development of HUS/TTP depending upon their
action, as well as the use of anti diarrhea medications
that should be avoided. Phosphoenolpyruvate
analogues may be helpful. Gentamicin, ampicillin,
ceftazidime, or beta-lactamase-stable cephalosporin
may be administered for neonatal meningitis.
Antibiotic therapy is further complicated by the presence of antibiotic resistant organisms.
Alternative treatment
Studies have been conducted to determine if diarrhea symptoms can be reduced by alternative therapies such as the consumption of herbal teas, psyllium,
and acupuncture. Patients should consult their doctors before using any alternative treatments, as E. coli
can be life threatening and should be closely
monitored.
Prognosis
In most cases of O157:H7, symptoms last for
about a week and recovery is often spontaneous. Ten
percent of individuals with E. coli O157:H7 infection
develop HUS; 5% of those will die of the disease.
Some who recover from HUS will be left with some
degree of kidney damage and possibly irritable bowel
syndrome. Additionally, there is a possibility of
chronic E. coli infection.
Infants that develop E. coli infections may be
permanently affected. Gastroenteritis may leave the
child with lactose intolerance. Neonates developing
meningitis from E. coli strains have a high morbidity
and mortality rate
Prevention
Thorough cooking of all meat and poultry products and adhering to proper food preparation is the
most effective way to avoid infection. More studies
are needed to determine the appropriate safety margins for killing these bacteria. Food irradiation methods are also being developed to sanitize food.
Vaccinations to E. coli 0157 are under development,
as are medications aimed at limiting the effects of the
verotoxin. The enforcement of regulations for meat
production and water are critical. Steam pasteurization is used in the United States and is being explored
in other countries.
Prevention of E. coli gastroenteritis in infants is
best achieved by breast-feeding. The breast milk contains antibodies that combat the infection. For bottlefed infants, care should be taken in the preparation of
the milk and bottles. Good hygiene of the umbilical
cord area is important. Keeping this area clean and
dry may reduce infection.
