Definition
Esophageal cancer is a malignancy that develops
in tissues of the hollow, muscular canal (esophagus)
along which food and liquid travel from the throat to
the stomach.
Description
Esophageal cancer usually originates in the inner
layers of the lining of the esophagus and grows outward. In time, the tumor can obstruct the passage of
food and liquid, making swallowing painful and difficult. Since most patients are not diagnosed until the
late stages of the disease, esophageal cancer is associated with poor quality of life and low survival rates.
Squamous cell carcinoma is the most common
type of esophageal cancer, accounting for 95% of all
esophageal cancers worldwide. The esophagus is normally lined with thin, flat squamous cells that resemble
tiny roof shingles. Squamous cell carcinoma can
develop at any point along the esophagus but is most
common in the middle portion.
Adenocarcinoma has surpassed squamous cell
carcinoma as the most common type of esophageal
cancer in the United States. Adenocarcinoma originates in glandular tissue not normally present in the
lining of the esophagus. Before adenocarcinoma can
develop, glandular cells must replace a section of squamous cells. This occurs in Barrett’s esophagus, a precancerous condition in which chronic acid reflux from
the stomach stimulates a transformation in cell type in
the lower portion of the esophagus.
A very small fraction of esophageal cancers are
melanomas, sarcomas, or lymphomas.
There is great variability in the incidence of esophageal cancer with regard to geography, ethnicity,
and gender. The overall incidence is increasing.
About 13,000 new cases of esophageal cancer are
diagnosed in the United States each year. During the
same 12-month period, 12,000 people die of this disease. It strikes between five and ten North Americans
per 100,000. In some areas of China the cancer is
endemic.
Squamous cell carcinoma usually occurs in the
sixth or seventh decade of life, with a greater incidence
in African-Americans than in others. Adenocarcinoma
develops earlier and is much more common in white
patients. In general, esophageal cancer occurs more
frequently in men than in women.
Causes and symptoms
The exact cause of esophageal cancer is unknown,
although many investigators believe that chronic irritation of the esophagus is a major culprit. Most of the
identified risk factors represent a form of chronic
irritation. However, the wide variance in the distribution of esophageal cancer among different demographic groups raises the possibility that genetic
factors also play a role.
Several risk factors are associated with esophageal
cancer.
 Tobacco and alcohol consumption are the major risk
factors, especially for squamous cell carcinoma.
Smoking and alcohol abuse each increase the risk of
squamous cell carcinoma by five-fold. The effects of
the two are synergistic, in that the combination of
smoking and alchohol increases the risk by 25- to
100- fold. It is estimated that drinking about 13
ounces of alcohol every day for an extended period
of time raises the risk of developing esophageal cancer by 18%. That likelihood increases to 44% in
individuals who also smoke one or two packs of
cigarettes a day. Smokeless tobacco also increases
the risk for esophageal cancer.
 Gastroesophageal reflux is a condition in which acid
from the stomach refluxes backwards into the lower
portion of the esophagus, sometimes causing symptoms of heartburn. In some cases of gastroesophageal
reflux, the chronic exposure to acid causes the inner
lining of the lower esophagus to change from squamous cells to glandular cells. This is called Barrett’s
esophagus. Patients with Barrett’s esophagus are
roughly 30 to 40 times more likely than the general
population to develop adenocarcinoma of the
esophagus.
 A diet low in fruits, vegetables, zinc, riboflavin, and
other vitamins can increase risk of developing to
esophageal cancer.
 Caustic injury to the esophagus inflicted by swallowing lye or other substances that damage esophageal
cells can lead to the development of squamous cell
esophageal cancer in later life.
 Achalasia is a condition in which the lower esophageal sphincter (muscle) cannot relax enough to let
food pass into the stomach. Squamous cell esophageal cancer develops in about 6% of patients with
achalasia.
 Tylosis is a rare inherited disease characterized by
excess skin on the palms and soles. Affected patients
have a much higher probability of developing esophageal cancer than the general population. They
should have regular screenings to detect the disease
in its early, most curable stages.
 Esophageal webs, which are protrusions of tissue
into the esophagus, and diverticula, which are outpouchings of the wall of the esophagus, are associated with a higher incidence of esophageal cancer.
Symptoms
Unfortunately, symptoms generally don’t appear
until the tumor has grown so large that the patient
cannot be cured. Dysphagia (trouble swallowing or a
sensation of having food stuck in the throat or chest) is
the most common symptom. Swallowing problems
may occur occasionally at first, and patients often
react by eating more slowly and chewing their food
more carefully and, as the tumor grows, switching to
soft foods or a liquid diet. Without treatment, the
tumor will eventually prevent even liquid from passing
into the stomach. A sensation of burning or slight midchest pressure is a rare, often-disregarded symptom of
esophageal cancer. Painful swallowing is usually a
symptom of a large tumor obstructing the opening of
the esophagus. It can lead to regurgitation of food,
weight loss, physical wasting, and malnutrition.
Anyone who has trouble swallowing, loses a significant amount of weight without dieting, or cannot eat
solid food because it is too painful to swallow should
see a doctor.
Diagnosis
A barium swallow is usually the first test performed on a patient whose symptoms suggest esophageal cancer. After the patient swallows a small amount
of barium, a series of x rays can highlight any bumps
or flat raised areas on the normally smooth surface of
the esophageal wall. It can also detect large, irregular
areas that narrow the esophagus in patients with
advanced cancer, but it cannot provide information about disease that has spread beyond the esophagus.
A double contrast study is a barium swallow with air
blown into the esophagus to improve the way the
barium coats the esophageal lining. Endoscopy is a
diagnostic procedure in which a thin lighted tube
(endoscope) is passed through the mouth, down the
throat, and into the esophagus. Cells that appear
abnormal are removed for biopsy. Once a diagnosis
of esophageal cancer has been confirmed through
biopsy, staging tests are performed to determine
whether the disease has spread (metastasized) to tissues or organs near the original tumor or in other parts
of the body. These tests may include computed tomography, endoscopic ultrasound, thoracoscopy, laparoscopy, and positron emission tomography.
Treatment
Treatment for esophageal cancer is determined by
the stage of the disease and the patient’s general
health. The most important distinction to make is
whether the cancer is curable. If the cancer is in the
early stages, cure may be possible. If the cancer is
advanced or if the patient will not tolerate major
surgery, treatment is usually directed at palliation
(relief of symptoms only) instead of cure.
Staging
Stage 0 is the earliest stage of the disease. Cancer
cells are confined to the innermost lining of the esophagus. Stage I esophageal cancer has spread slightly
deeper, but still has not extended to nearby tissues,
lymph nodes, or other organs. In Stage IIA, cancer has
invaded the thick, muscular layer of the esophagus
that propels food into the stomach and may involve
connective tissue covering the outside of the
esophagus. In Stage IIB, cancer has spread to lymph
nodes near the esophagus and may have invaded deeper layers of esophageal tissue. Stage III esophageal
cancer has spread to tissues or lymph nodes near the
esophagus or to the trachea (windpipe) or other
organs near the esophagus. Stage IV cancer has spread
to distant organs like the liver, bones, and brain.
Recurrent esophageal cancer is disease that develops
in the esophagus or another part of the body after
initial treatment.
Surgery
The most common operations for the treatment
of esophageal cancer are esophagectomy and esophagogastrectomy. Esophagectomy is the removal
of the cancerous part of the esophagus and nearby
lymph nodes. This procedure is performed only on
patients with very early cancer that has not spread to
the stomach. Esophagogastrectomy is the removal of
the cancerous part of the esophagus, nearby lymph
nodes, and the upper part of the stomach. The
resected esophagus is replaced with the stomach or
parts of intestine so the patient can swallow. These
procedures can significantly relieve symptoms and
improve the nutritional status of more than 80% of
patients with dysphagia. Although surgery can cure
some patients whose disease has not spread beyond
the esophagus, but more than 75% of esophageal
cancers have spread to other organs before being
diagnosed. Less extensive surgical procedures can
be used for palliation.
Chemotherapy
Oral or intravenous chemotherapy alone will
not cure esophageal cancer, but pre-operative treatments can shrink tumors and increase the probability that cancer can be surgically eradicated.
Palliative chemotherapy can relieve symptoms of
advanced cancer but will not alter the outcome of
the disease.
Radiation
External beam or internal radiation, delivered by
machine or implanted near cancer cells inside the
body, is only rarely used as the primary form of treatment. Post-operative radiation is sometimes used to
kill cancer cells that couldn’t be surgically removed.
Palliative radiation is effective in relieving dysphagia
in patients who cannot be cured. However, radiation is
most useful when combined with chemotherapy as
either the definitive treatment or preoperative
treatment.Palliation
In addition to surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation, other palliative measures can provide symptomatic relief. Dilatation of the narrowed portion of
the esophagus with soft tubes can provide short-term
relief of dysphagia. Placement of a flexible, selfexpanding stent within the narrowed portion is also
useful in allowing more food intake.
Follow-up treatments
Regular barium swallows and other imaging studies are necessary to detect recurrence or spread of
disease or new tumor development.
Alternative treatment
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) involves intravenously injecting a drug that is absorbed by cancer
cells and kills them after they are exposed to specific laser beams. PDT can be used for palliation,
but it also cured some early esophageal cancers
during preliminary studies. Researchers are comparing its benefits with those of more established
therapies.
Endoscopic laser therapy involves delivering
short, powerful laser treatments to the tumor through
an endoscope. It can improve dysphagia, but multiple
treatments are required, and the benefit is seldom
long-lasting.
Prognosis
Since most patients are diagnosed when the cancer
has spread to lymph nodes or other structures, the
prognosis for esophageal cancer is poor. Generally,
no more than half of all patients are candidates for
curative treatment. Even if cure is attempted, the cancer can recur.
Prevention
There is no known way to prevent esophageal
cancer.