Definition
An endoscope as used in the field of gastroenterology (the medical study of the stomach and intestines) is a thin, flexible tube that uses a lens or
miniature camera to view various areas of the gastrointestinal tract. When the procedure is limited to the
examination of the inside of the gastrointestinal tract’s
upper portion, it is called upper endoscopy or esphagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD). With the endoscope,
the esophagus (swallowing tube), stomach, and duodenum (first portion of the small intestine) can be
easily examined, and abnormalities frequently treated.
Patients are usually sedated during the exam.
Purpose
EGD is performed to evaluate or treat symptoms
relating to the upper gastrointestinal tract, such as:
 upper abdominal or chest pain
 nausea or vomiting
 difficulty swallowing (dysphagia)
 bleeding from the upper intestinal tract
 anemia (low blood count). EGD can be used to treat
certain conditions, such as an area of narrowing or
bleeding in the upper gastrointestinal tract
Upper endoscopy is more accurate than x rays for
detecting inflammation, ulcers, or tumors. It is used to
diagnose early cancer and can frequently determine
whether a growth is benign (not cancerous) or malignant (cancerous).
Biopsies (small tissue samples) of inflamed or
‘‘suspicious’’ areas can be obtained and examined by
a pathologist. Cell scrapings can also be taken by the
introduction of a small brush; this helps in the diagnosis of cancer or infections.
When treating conditions in the upper gastrointestinal tract, small instruments are passed through the
endoscope that can stretch narrowed areas (strictures),
or remove swallowed objects (such as coins or pins). In
addition, bleeding from ulcers or vessels can be treated
by a number of endoscopic techniques.
Recent studies have shown the usefulness of endoscopic removal of early tumors of the esophagus or
stomach. This is done either with injection of certain
materials (like alcohol), or with the use of instruments
(like lasers) that burn the tumor. Other techniques
combining medications and lasers also show promise.
Precautions
Patients should inquire as to the doctor’s expertise
with these procedures, especially when therapy is the
main goal. The doctor should be informed of any
allergies, medication use, and medical problems.
Description
First, a ‘‘topical’’ (local) medication to numb the
gag reflex is given either by spray or is gargled.
Patients are usually sedated for the procedure (though
not always) by injection of medications into a vein.
The endoscopist then has the patient swallow the
scope, which is passed through the upper gastrointestinal tract. The lens or camera at the end of the instrument allows the endoscopist to examine each portion
of the upper gastrointestinal tract; photos can be taken
for reference. Air is pumped in through the instrument
to allow proper observation. Biopsies and other procedures can be performed without any significant
discomfort.
Preparation
The upper intestinal tract must be empty for the
procedure, so it is necessary NOT to eat or drink for at
least 6–12 hours before the exam. Patients need to
inquire about taking their medications before the
procedure.
Aftercare
Someone should be available to take the person
home after the procedure and stay with them for a
while; patients will not be able to drive themselves due
to sedation. Pain or any other unusual symptoms
should be reported immediately.
It is important to recognize early signs of any
possible complication. The doctor should be notified
if the patient has fever, trouble swallowing, or increasing throat, chest, or abdominal pain.
Risks
EGD is safe and well tolerated; however, complications can occur as with any procedure. These are most
oftendue tomedicationsused during theprocedure, or are
related to endoscopic therapy. The overall complication
rate of EGD is less than 2%, and many of these complications are minor (such as inflammation of the vein through
which medication is given). However, serious ones can
and do occur, and almost half of them are related to the
heart or lungs. Bleeding or perforations (holes in the
gastrointestinal tract) are also reported, especially when
tumors or narrowed areas are treated or biopsied.
Infections have also been rarely transmitted; improved
cleaning techniques should be able to prevent them.