Definition
The esophagus is a tube that connects the back of
the mouth to the stomach. Abnormalities of the esophagus generally fall into one of four categories: structural abnormalities, motility disorders, inflammatory
disorders, and malignancies.
Description
The main function of the esophagus is to move
food from the back of the mouth to the stomach. The
adult esophagus is about 10 in (25 cm) long. It is
consists of a layer of cells that secretes mucus and two
layers of muscle, one circular and one longitudinal.
This combination of muscles allows the esophagus to
contract and propel food from the mouth the stomach.
This rhythmic contraction is called peristalsis. At the
end of the esophagus nearest the mouth is a ring of
muscle called the upper esophageal sphincter (UES). A
similar muscular ring called the lower esophageal
sphincter (LES) is found 1–1.5 in (2–4 cm) above the
point where the esophagus enters the stomach. The
LES contracts to prevent the contents of the stomach
from backflowing into the lower end of the esophagus.
Structural abnormalities
Structural abnormalities of the esophagus can be
either congenital or acquired. Congenital abnormalities occur in about 1 of every 3,000–5,000 births. The
two most common congenital esophageal abnormalities are esophageal atresia (EA) and tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF).
EA is a condition in which the esophagus is interrupted and the portion of the tube near the mouth is
not connected to the portion that goes into the stomach. Usually the upper part of the tube ends in a
blind pouch. This creates a life-threatening condition
for the newborn who is unable to eat.
TEF is a condition in which the esophagus is
connected to the trachea (windpipe). The trachea and
the esophagus lie parallel to each other in the neck.
Sometimes during fetal development, a connection
called a fistula develops between these two tubes.
This allows food to enter the trachea and be inhaled
into the lungs causing a life-threatening condition
called aspiration pneumonia. Often TEF and EA are
present in the same infant. Both these conditions must
be surgically corrected for the infant to survive.
Other, less common congenital structural
abnormalities include webs, stenosis, cysts, and diverticula. Webs are thin membranes that lie across the
esophagus and cause a partial obstruction. Stenosis is
the abnormal reduction in the diameter of the esophagus due to thickening of the esophageal wall
Diverticula are pouches of tissue that extend off the
esophagus. Both diverticula and stenosis can be either
congenital or acquired later in life.
Acquired structural abnormalities of the esophagus include Schatzki ring and hiatal hernia. Schatzki
ring, sometimes called a lower esophageal ring, is a
circular band of tissue located where the esophagus
empties into the stomach. This ring is found in 6–14%
of individuals, and for most people the presence of this
ring does not create symptoms. Schatzki ring is found
equally in all races and in both men and women.
Schatzki rings that cause symptoms usually occur in
middle age individuals. The ring can cause intermittent problems swallowing food or food impaction
where the esophagus enters the stomach.
The esophagus passes a gap in the diaphragm
called the diaphragmatic hiatus in order to reach the
stomach. Hiatal hernia (also called hiatus hernia) is a
condition that occurs when a portion of the stomach
pushes up through this gap next to the esophagus.
Although a hiatus hernia is not a direct structural
abnormality of the esophagus, it is associated with
gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) or heartburn
in which the acidic stomach contents backflow into the
lower part of the esophagus and erode the cell lining.
Hiatal hernia is very common and often causes no
symptoms. It is treated as a separate entry.
Lacerations, tears and ruptures of the esophagus,
known as Mallory-Weiss syndrome and Boerhaave
syndrome, are life-threatening disorders. MalloryWeiss syndrome usually occurs in alcoholics. In both
conditions, tears result from vomiting and retching.
The resulting bleeding creates a medical emergency
that can be fatal.
Motility abnormalities
Motility abnormalities create difficulty in swallowing, called dysphagia. Dysphagia is a symptom of
several esophageal motility disorders as well as several
obstructive disorders such as esophageal webs or
Schatzki ring.
Achalasia is an esophageal motility disorder
caused by uncoordinated contractions of the two muscular layers that make up the esophagus. Because
muscular contractions are disorganized, peristalsis
and the orderly movement of food down the esophagus does not occur. In addition, with achalasia the
lower esophageal sphincter remains contracted when
food is present in the esophagus which prevents the
food from entering the stomach. This causes the esophagus to bulge above the LES, a condition called
megaesophagus.
Achalasia is caused by destruction of some of the
nerve cells that control muscular contraction of the
esophagus. This disorder generally begins in young
adults and becomes progressively worse as the individual ages. Individuals with achalasia also have a
higher risk of developing esophageal cancer at an earlier than usual age.
Individuals can also develop esophageal motility
disorders secondary to other muscle diseases.
Scleroderma is a disorder in which smooth muscle
begins to atrophy. The smooth muscle in the esophagus can be affected just like other smooth muscle in the
body, making swallowing difficult. Scleroderma esophagus is also associated with GERD and increased
risk of cancer of the esophagus. Other conditions such
as diabetes mellitus, alcoholism, and some psychiatric
disorders can also produce secondary esophageal
motility disorders.
Inflammatory disorders
Inflammatory esophageal disorders fall under the
general name of esophagitis. Esophagitis causes the
esophagus to become swollen and the lining of
the esophagus becomes eroded and sore. It is present
in about 5% of the population in the United States.
There are four main types of esophagitis: reflux, infection, corrosive, and radiation. Reflux esophagitis is
caused by GERD when the lower esophageal sphincter does not close tightly and the acidic contents of the
stomach enter esophagus. GERD is common and is
treated in depth in a separate entry. Infectious esophagitis can be caused fungal, viral, or bacterial infections.
Infectious esophagitis occurs frequently in individuals
with compromised immune systems, such as those
with AIDS or leukemia. Corrosive esophagitis occurs
when an individual either intentionally or accidentally
swallows harsh chemicals such as lye. Radiation esophagitis is a complication of radiation treatments for
cancer of the esophagus or lung.
Malignancies
Barrett’s esophagus is a pre-cancerous condition
which has a high risk of developing into esophageal
cancer. It is found most commonly in white males in
their 50s and 60s and is usually associated with years
of chronic GERD.
Cancers of the esophagus tend to be aggressive
and have poor outcomes. Adenocarcinoma is the primary cancer of the esophagus. Esophageal cancers are
treated in detail in a separate entry.
Causes and symptoms
The causes of esophageal disorders depend on the
type of disorder. Congenital defects are caused by
errors in development. It is not clear why some structural disorders, such as Schatzki ring and hiatal
hernia, occur. Many more people have these defects
than develop symptoms or seek medical care, so that
the presence of these asymptomatic structural defects
is found only during autopsies. Other individuals
develop symptoms that require medical attention.
Obesity and advancing age are thought to be contributing factors in developing symptoms.
Achalasia is caused by death of nerve cells that
control the muscles that make peristalsis possible.
These nerve cells are destroyed by T cells that are
part of the body’s immune system. It is not clear
what triggers these T cells to attack inappropriately.
Difficulty swallowing develops slowly, usually beginning in young adults, although the disorder can occur
in children. As nerve control is lost, the LES fails to
relax, preventing food from entering the stomach. As a
result, the lower part of the esophagus becomes
stretched creating a condition called megaesophagus.
At night, food is often regurgitated and can be inhaled
into the lungs, creating the risk of aspiration pneumonia. Achalasia can also be caused by Chagas’ disease, a
disease rare in North America, but common in Central
and South America. Individuals with achalasia are
also at higher risk to develop esophageal cancer, esophageal infections, and esophageal rupture.
Inflammatory esophagitis is most often caused by GERD. Infectious esophagitis can be caused by fungi,
usually Candida albicans, bacteria, or viruses. Fungal
infections usually occur in individuals who have diabetes, a weakened immune system, or who are taking
antibiotics. Antibiotics change the balance of naturally
occurring bacteria in the esophagus and allow fungi,
which are normally present in the digestive tract, to
grow unchecked. The most common causes of viral
esophagitis are cytomegalovirus (CMV) and Herpes
simplex. These are usually opportunistic infections in
individuals with HIV/AIDS.
Corrosive esophagitis is usually caused by swallowing harsh chemicals, but it can also be caused by
certain medications. Radiation esophagus is a side
effect of radiation therapy for cancer.
Diagnosis
EA and TEF can sometimes be diagnosed in fetal
ultrasounds before birth. If not, these defects become
obvious soon after birth, because the infant is unable
to eat. The inability to pass a tube from the mouth to
the stomach is a definite diagnosis for EA. TEF can be
detected through x-rays.
A barium swallow x ray with video is the basic
method of diagnosing most esophageal disorders. For a barium swallow x ray, the individual drinks a barium, a material that coats the esophagus and shows up
on x-ray film. A video camera records the passage of
the barium down the esophagus in order to detect
swallowing disorders or pockets and pouches (diverticula) bulging from the esophagus. A barium swallow
is also used to detect Schatzki rings.
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy is often used in
conjunction with a barium swallow to diagnose esophageal disorders. In an endoscopy, a thin, fiberoptic
tube with a tiny camera is inserted into the esophagus.
This allows the physician to see the lining of the esophagus. Endoscopes are equipped to take samples
(biopsies) of any areas that may appear pre-cancerous
or cancerous or to collect samples to test for the
organism causing infectious esophagitis.
GERD can often be diagnosed from symptoms
such as heartburn and regurgitation. Mallory-Weiss
tears and Boerhaave syndrome are difficult to diagnose. Individuals with these disorders are often
severely ill and have intense chest pain and vomiting,
however chest x rays are normal 10–15% of the
time. CT scans may be used in conjunction with
chest x rays.
Treatment
Surgery is the only treatment for EA and TEF. It
is done as soon as possible, based on the condition of
the infant and any other birth defects that may be
present that could affect the surgery.
Schatzki rings and hiatal hernias often cause no or
mild symptoms and need no treatment. In severe cases,
Schatzki rings are treated with bougienage. In this
treatment, a series of tubes of ever-increasing diameter
are inserted through the esophagus to stretch the ring.
Stretching can also be done with balloon dilation.
Surgery is done when no other treatment succeeds in
relieving symptoms. Large hiatal hernias can be
repaired surgically, but often there is not need for
treatment. GERD accompanies many hiatal hernias.
GERD can be treated with drugs to block acid production in the stomach (H2 blockers or proton pump
inhibitors) and changes in diet. In severe cases of
GERD stomach surgery may be necessary.
Mallory-Weiss syndrome and Boerhaave syndrome are medical emergencies. The individual is
stabilized and the tear or rupture is repaired surgically.
The chance of infection (sepsis) is high, so individuals
are admitted to intensive care and do not take
any food or liquid by mouth for 7–10 days. Hospital
stays can last months, and repeated tears are possible.
Achalasia is treated with drugs that relax the
smooth muscle and allow the LES to relax and open.
When this fails, surgery to may be needed. Individuals
that are not good candidates for surgery (the elderly or
frail) may be treated by injecting botulinum toxin
(botox) into the LES to prevent it from closing. The
disadvantage of this treatment is its expense and the
fact that more than one injection is needed.
Infectious esophagitis is treated by treating the
underlying cause of the disease with antifungal, antiviral or antibiotic medications. These can be given
either by mouth or intravenously (IV) depending on
the severity of the disease.
Malignancies are treated with chemotherapy and
radiation. See the entry on esophageal cancer for specific details.
Prognosis
The outcome of treatment depends on the type of
disorder, severity, age, and general health of the individual. EA and TEF surgeries are often successful, but
infants born with these conditions frequently have
other congenital abnormalities that compromise their
health.
When needed, treatment for Schatzki rings produces relief of symptoms, but almost always has to be
repeated periodically.
Mallory-Weiss and Boerhaave syndromes are
often fatal. Thirty to fifty percent of individuals die
from these disorders even if they are diagnosed
promptly. If diagnosis is delayed, the death rate can
be as high as 90%.
Achalasia and scleroderma esophagus are progressive diseases that need continued therapy. They
frequently lead to serious weight loss and malnutrition.
The outcome for treatment of inflammatory esophagitis depends almost entirely on the success of
treating the underlying cause. Where individuals
have a weakened immune system, infectious esophagitis can be an ongoing problem. When inflammatory
esophagitis is caused by GERD, treatment along with
lifestyle modification is usually successful in providing
relief.
Esophageal cancers are aggressive and have generally poor outcomes.
Prevention
Many symptoms of esophageal disorders can be
prevented or alleviated by lifestyle changes that
include:
 weight loss to control obesity
 eating slowly and chewing food well
 eating smaller and more frequent meals
 not eating several hours before going to bed
 limiting the use of alcohol and caffeine