Definition
Evoked potential studies are a group of tests of the
nervous system that measure electrical signals along
the nerve pathways.
Purpose
Nerves convey information to the body by sending electrical signals down the length of the nerve.
These signals can be recorded by wires placed over
the nerves on the surface of the skin, in a procedure
called an evoked potential (EP) study. The person
conducting the test evokes the patient’s neural activity
by visual or auditory stimulation or using a mild electrical shock. This causes changes in the electrical
potential in the nerves. Analysis of the signals can
provide information about the condition of nerve
pathways, especially those in the brain and spinal
cord. They can indicate the presence of disease or
degeneration, and can help determine the location of
nerve lesions.
There are three major types of EP studies used
regularly:
 Visual evoked potentials are used to diagnose visual
losses due to optic nerve damage, especially from
multiple sclerosis. They are also useful to diagnose
‘‘hysterical blindness,’’ in which loss of vision is not
due to any nerve damage.
 Auditory evoked potentials are used to diagnose
hearing losses. They can distinguish damage to the
acoustic nerve (which carries signals from the ear to
the brain stem) from damage to the auditory pathways within the brainstem. Most auditory EPs
record activity from the brainstem, and are therefore
called ‘‘brainstem auditory evoked potentials.’’
Disorders diagnosed with auditory EPs include
acoustic neuroma (tumors of the inner ear) and multiple sclerosis (chronic disease in which nerves lose
patches of their outer covering). They may also be
used to assess high frequency hearing ability, to
determine brain death, and to monitor brainstem
function during surgery
 Somatosensory evoked potentials record transmission of nerve impulses from the limbs to the brain,
and can be used to diagnose nerve damage or degeneration within the spinal cord or nerve roots from
multiple sclerosis, trauma, or other degenerative disease. Somatosensory EPs can be used to distinguish
central versus peripheral nerve disease, when combined with results from a nerve conduction velocity
test, which measures nerve function in the
extremities.
Precautions
Evoked potential studies are painless, noninvasive, and without any significant risk. Somatosensory
EP tests involve very mild electric shocks, usually felt
as a tingling.
Description
The person performing the test locates and marks
specific spots on the patient’s head for placement of
electrodes. These spots are cleaned, and an adhesive
conducting paste is applied. Cup electrodes are
attached. For somatosensory EP, spots on the arm
or leg are also marked and cleaned; electrodes may
be taped in place. The patient sits or reclines in a chair
throughout the tests.
For a visual EP, the patient focuses on a TV screen
which displays a checkerboard pattern. The eye not
being tested is covered with a patch. For children or
others whose attention may wander, goggles are used
which show the pattern to one eye at a time. Each eye
is usually tested twice, and the entire procedure takes
approximately 30–45 minutes.
For auditory EP, headphones are used to deliver a
series of clicks to one ear at a time. A masking or static
sound is played into the other ear. Each ear is usually
tested twice, and the entire procedure takes approximately 30–45 minutes.
For somatosensory EP, mild electrical shocks are
delivered to the arm or leg. This may cause some
twitching and tingling. The stimulus lasts for about
two minutes at a time, and the entire procedure takes
approximately 30 minutes.
After the tests, the electrodes are removed with
acetone and the scalp is cleaned.
Preparation
Hair must be clean, dry, and free of any braids,
pins, or jewelry. The patient should shampoo before
the test, and must not use any hair spray, gel, or other
hair care products after shampooing. Clothing should
be loose and comfortable. The patient may eat and
take some medications as usual before the test,
although sedative medications should be avoided on
the day of the test, if possible. It is best to check with
the physician supervising the test for specific
instructions.
Aftercare
This test is painless and has no residual effects.
The patient may return to work or other activities
immediately afterward.
Normal results
EP test results are displayed as jagged electrical
tracings (wave forms), which have characteristic
shapes, heights, and lengths, indicating the speed and
intensity of signal transmission. Results are read by
someone trained in evoked potential studies.
Abnormal results
Changes in the electrical tracings may indicate
damage to or degeneration of nerve pathways to the
brain from the eyes, ears, or limbs. Absence of any
activity may mean complete loss of nerve function in
that pathway. Other changes may provide evidence of
the type and location of nerve damage.