Definition
Exercise is physical activity that is planned, structured, and repetitive for the purpose of conditioning
any part of the body. Exercise is utilized to improve
health, maintain fitness and is important as a means of
physical rehabilitation.
Purpose
Exercise is useful in preventing or treating coronary heart disease, osteoporosis, weakness, diabetes,
obesity, and depression. Range of motion is one aspect
of exercise important for increasing or maintaining
joint function. Strengthening exercises provide appropriate resistance to the muscles to increase endurance
and strength. Cardiac rehabilitation exercises are
developed and individualized to improve the cardiovascular system for prevention and rehabilitation of
cardiac disorders and diseases. A well-balanced exercise program can improve general health, build endurance, and delay many of the effects of aging. The
benefits of exercise not only improve physical health,
but also enhance emotional well-being.
A study released in 2003 reported that exercise
combined with behavioral therapy may even help
manage the symptoms experienced by Gulf War veterans. Specifically, exercise helped improve symptoms
related to fatigue, distress, cognitive problems and
mental health functioning. In the same year, the
American Heart Association released a statement saying that exercise was beneficial even for patients awaiting heart transplants. Another study showed that
women who participated in strenuous physical activity
over a number of years could reduce their risk for
breast cancer. Finally, research showed that men and
women age 40 to 50 who exercised moderately for 60
to 90 minutes a day were less likely to catch a cold than
those who sat around.
Precautions
Before beginning any exercise program, an evaluation by a physician is recommended to rule out any
potential health risks. Once health and fitness are
determined, and any or all physical restrictions identified, an individual’s exercise program should be under
the supervision of a health care professional. This is
particularly true when exercise is used as a form of
rehabilitation. If symptoms of dizziness, nausea, excessive shortness of breath, or chest pain are present during any exercise program, an individual should stop
the activity and inform a physician about these symptoms before resuming activity. Exercise equipment
must be checked to determine if it can bear the weight
of people of all sizes and shapes.
Description
Range of motion exercise
Range of motion exercise refers to activity aimed
at improving movement of a specific joint. This
motion is influenced by several structures: configuration of bone surfaces within the joint, joint capsule,
ligaments, and muscles and tendons acting on the
joint. There are three types of range of motion exercises: passive, active, and active assists. Passive range
of motion is movement applied to a joint solely by
another person or persons or a passive motion
machine. When passive range of motion is applied,
the joint of an individual receiving exercise is completely relaxed while the outside force moves the body
part, such as a leg or arm, throughout the available
range. Injury, surgery, orimmobilization of a joint may
affect the normal joint range of motion. Active range
of motion is movement of a joint provided entirely by
the individual performing the exercise. In this case,
there is no outside force aiding in the movement.
Active assist range of motion is described as a joint
receiving partial assistance from an outside force. This
range of motion may result from the majority of
motion applied by an exerciser or by the person or
persons assisting the individual. It also may be a halfand-half effort on the joint from each source.
Strengthening exercise
Strengthening exercise increases muscle strength
and mass, bone strength, and the body’s metabolism.
It can help attain and maintain proper weight and
improve body image and self-esteem. A certain level
of muscle strength is needed to do daily activities, such
as walking, running and climbing stairs. Strengthening
exercises increase this muscle strength by putting more
strain on a muscle than it is normally accustomed to
receiving. This increased load stimulates the growth of
proteins inside each muscle cell that allow the muscle
as a whole to contract. There is evidence indicating
that strength training may be better than aerobic exercise alone for improving self-esteem and body image.
Weight training allows one immediate feedback,
through observation of progress in muscle growth
and improved muscle tone. Strengthening exercise
can take the form of isometric, isotonic and isokinetic
strengthening.
ISOMETRIC EXERCISE. During isometric exercises,
muscles contract. However, there is no motion in the
affected joints. The muscle fibers maintain a constant
length throughout the entire contraction. The exercises are usually performed against an immovable surface or object such as pressing one’s hand against a
wall. The muscles of the arm are contracting but the
wall is not reacting or moving as a result of the physical effort. Isometric training is effective for developing
total strength of a particular muscle or group of muscles. It often is used for rehabilitation since the exact
area of muscle weakness can be isolated and strengthening can be administered at the proper joint angle.
This kind of training can provide a relatively quick
and convenient method for overloading and strengthening muscles without any special equipment and with
little chance of injury.
ISOTONIC EXERCISE. Isotonic exercise differs from
isometric exercise in that there is movement of a joint
during the muscle contraction. A classic example of an
isotonic exercise is weight training with dumbbells and
barbells. As the weight is lifted throughout the range
of motion, the muscle shortens and lengthens.
Calisthenics are also an example of isotonic exercise.
These would include chin-ups, push-ups, and sit-ups,
all of which use body weight as the resistance force.
ISOKINETIC EXERCISE. Isokinetic exercise utilizes
machines that control the speed of contraction within
the range of motion. Isokinetic exercise attempts to
combine the best features of both isometrics and
weight training. It provides muscular overload at a
constant preset speed while a muscle mobilizes its
force through the full range of motion. For example,
an isokinetic stationary bicycle set at 90 revolutions
per minute means that despite how hard and fast the
exerciser works, the isokinetic properties of the bicycle
will allow the exerciser to pedal only as fast as 90 revolutions per minute. Machines known as Cybex
and Biodex provide isokinetic results; they generally
are used by physical therapists.
Cardiac rehabilitation
Exercise can be very helpful in prevention and
rehabilitation of cardiac disorders and disease. With
an individually designed exercise program set at a level
considered safe for the individual, people with symptoms of heart failure can substantially improve their
fitness levels. The greatest benefit occurs as muscles
improve the efficiency of their oxygen use, which
reduces the need for the heart to pump as much
blood. While such exercise doesn’t appear to improve
the condition of the heart itself, the increased fitness
level reduces the total workload of the heart. The
related increase in endurance also should translate
into a generally more active lifestyle. Endurance or
aerobic routines, such as running, brisk walking,
cycling, or swimming, increase the strength and efficiency of the muscles of the heart.
Preparation
A physical examination by a physician is important to determine if strenuous exercise is appropriate
or detrimental for an individual. Prior to the exercise
program, proper stretching is important to prevent the
possibility of soft tissue injury resulting from tight
muscles, tendons, ligaments, and other joint-related
structures.
Aftercare
Proper cool down after exercise is important in
reducing the occurrence of painful muscle spasms. It
has been documented that proper cool down also may
decrease frequency and intensity of muscle stiffness
the day following any exercise program.
Risks
Improper warm up can lead to muscle strains.
Overexertion without enough time between exercise sessions to recuperate also can lead to muscle strains,
resulting in inactivity due to pain. Stress fractures also
are a possibility if activities are strenuous over long
periods of time without proper rest. Although exercise
is safe for the majority of children and adults, there is
still a need for further studies to identify potential risks.
Normal results
Significant health benefits are obtained by including a moderate amount of physical exercise in the form
of an exercise prescription. This is much like a drug
prescription in that it also helps enhance the health of
those who take it in the proper dosage. Physical activity plays a positive role in preventing disease and
improving overall health status. People of all ages,
both male and female, benefit from regular physical
activity. Regular exercise also provides significant psychological benefits and improves quality of life.
Studies released in 2003 showed the actual activity in
the brain promoted by regular aerobic exercise. It
appears that exercise also improves problem solving
and other brain-related abilities.
Abnormal results
There is a possibility of exercise burnout if an
exercise program is not varied and adequate rest periods are not taken between exercise sessions. Muscle,
joint, and cardiac disorders have been noted among
people who exercise. However, they often have had
preexisting or underlying illnesses.