Definition
Expectorants are drugs that loosen and clear
mucus and phlegm from the respiratory tract.
Purpose
The drug described here, guaifenesin, is a common
ingredient in cough medicines. It is classified as an
expectorant, a medicine that helps clear mucus and
other secretions from the respiratory tract. However,
some debate exists about how effectively guaifenesin
does this. In addition, some cough medicines contain
other ingredients that may cancel out guaifenesin’s
effects. Cough suppressants such as codeine, for example, work against guaifenesin because they discourage
coughing up the secretions that the expectorant
loosens.
There are other ways to loosen and clear the
respiratory secretions associated with colds. These
include using a humidifier and drinking six to eight
glasses of water a day.
Description
Guaifenesin is an ingredient in many cough medicines, such as the brand names Anti-Tuss, Dristan
Cold & Cough, Guaifed, GuaiCough, and some
Robitussin products. Some products that contain
guaifenesin are available only with a physician’s prescription; others can be bought without a prescription.
They come in several forms, including capsules,
tablets, and liquids.
Recommended dosage
Adults and children 12 and over
200–400 mg every four hours. No more than 2,400
mg in 24 hours.
Children 6–11
100–200 mg every four hours. No more than 1,200
mg in 24 hours.
Children 2–5
50–100 mg every four hours. No more than 600
mg in 24 hours.
Children under two
Not recommended.
Precautions
Do not take more than the recommended daily
dosage of guaifenesin.
Guaifenesin is not meant to be used for coughs
associated with asthma, emphysema, chronic bronchitis, or smoking. It also should not be used for coughs
that are producing a large amount of mucus.
A lingering cough could be a sign of a serious
medical condition. Coughs that last more than seven
days or are associated with fever, rash, sore throat, or
lasting headache should have medical attention. Call a
physician as soon as possible.
Some studies suggest that guaifenesin causes birth
defects. Women who are pregnant or plan to become
pregnant should check with their physicians before
using any products that contain guaifenesin.
Whether guaifenesin passes into breast milk is not
known, but no ill effects have been reported in nursing
babies whose mothers used guaifenesin.
Side effects
Side effects are rare, but may include vomiting,
diarrhea, stomach upset, headache, skin rash, and
hives.
Interactions
Guaifenesin is not known to interact with any
foods or other drugs. However, cough medicines that
contain guaifenesin may contain other ingredients that
do interact with foods or drugs. Check with a physician or pharmacist for details about specific products.