Definition
Eye muscle surgery is surgery to weaken,
strengthen, or reposition any of the muscles that
move the eyeball (the extraocular muscles).
Purpose
The purpose of eye muscle surgery is generally to
align the pair of eyes so that they gaze in the same
direction and move together as a team, either to
improve appearance or to aid in the development of
binocular vision in a young child. To achieve binocular vision, the goal is to align the eyes so that the
location of the image on the retina of one eye corresponds to the location of the image on the retina of the
other eye.In addition, sometimes eye muscle surgery can
help people with other eye disorders (nystagmus and
Duane syndrome, for example).
Precautions
Depth perception (stereopsis) develops around
the age of three months old. For successful development of binocular vision and the ability to perceive
three-dimensionally, the surgery should not be postponed past the age of four. The earlier the surgery the
better the outcome, so an early diagnosis is important.
Surgery may even be performed before two years old.
After surgery, if binocular vision is to develop, corrective lenses and eye exercises (vision therapy) will probably be necessary.
Description
The extraocular muscles attach via tendons to the
sclera (the white, opaque, outer protective covering of
the eyeball) at different places just behind an imaginary equator circling the top, bottom, left, and right of
the eye. The other end of each of these muscles
attaches to a part of the orbit (the eye socket in the
skull). These muscles enable the eyes to move up,
down, to one side or the other, or any angle in
between.
Normally both eyes move together, receive the
same image on corresponding locations on both retinas, and the brain fuses these images into one threedimensional image. The exception is in strabismus
which is a disorder where one or both eyes deviate
out of alignment, most often outwardly (exotropia)
or toward the nose (esotropia). The brain now receives
two different images, and either suppresses one or the
person sees double (diplopia). This deviation can be
adjusted by weakening or strengthening the appropriate muscles to move the eyes toward the center. For
example, if an eye turns upward, the muscle at the
bottom of the eye could be strengthened.
Rarely, eye muscle surgery is performed on people
with nystagmus or Duane syndrome. Nystagmus is a
condition where one or both eyes move rapidly or
oscillate; it can sometimes be helped by moving the
eyes to the position of least oscillation. Duane syndrome is a disorder where there is limited horizontal
eye movement; it can sometimes be relieved by surgery
to weaken an eye muscle.
There are two methods to alter extraocular muscles. Traditional surgery can be used to strengthen,
weaken, or reposition an extraocular muscle. The surgeon first makes an incision in the conjunctiva (the
clear membrane covering the sclera), then puts a
suture into the muscle to prevent it from getting lost
and loosens the muscle from the eyeball with a surgical
hook. During a resection, the muscle is detached from
the sclera, a piece of muscle is removed so the muscle is
now shorter, and the muscle is reattached to the same
place. This strengths the muscle. In a recession, the
muscle is made weaker by repositioning it. More than
one extraocular eye muscle might be operated on at
the same time.
Another way of weakening eye muscles, using
botulinum toxin injected into the muscle, was introduced in the early 1980s. Although the botulinum
toxin wears off, the realignment may be permanent,
depending upon whether neurological connections for
binocular vision were established during the time the
toxin was active. This technique can also be used to
adjust a muscle after traditional surgery.
The cost of eye muscle surgery is about $2,000–
$4,000, and about 700,000 surgeries are performed
annually in the United States.
Preparation
Patients should make sure their doctors are aware
of any medications that they are taking, even over-thecounter medications. Patients should not take aspirin,
or any other blood-thinning medications for ten days
prior to surgery, and should not eat or drink after
midnight the night before.
Aftercare
Patients will need someone to drive them home
after their surgery. They should continue to avoid
aspirin and other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
agents for an additional three days, but they can take
acetaminophen (e.g., Tylenol). Patients should discuss
this with the surgeon to be clear what medications they
can or cannot take. Pain will subside after two to three
days, and patients can resume most normal activities
within a few days. Again, this may vary with the
patient and the patient should discuss returning to
normal activity with the surgeon. They should not
get their eyes wet for three to four days and should
refrain from swimming for 10 days. Operated eyes will
be red for about two weeks.
Risks
As with any surgery, there are risks involved. Eye
muscle surgery is relatively safe, but very rarely a cut
muscle gets lost and can not be retrieved. This, and other serious reactions, including those caused by
anesthetics, can result in vision loss in the affected
eye. Occasionally, retinal or nerve damage occurs.
Double vision is not uncommon after eye muscle surgery. As mentioned earlier, glasses or vision therapy
may be necessary.
Normal results
Cosmetic improvement is likely with success rate
estimates varying from about 65–85%. According to
the best statistics as of 1998, binocular vision is
improved in young children about 35% of the time.
There is no improvement, or the condition worsens
15–35% of the time. A second operation may rectify
less-than-perfect outcomes.