Definition
An eye examination is a series of tests that measure a person’s ocular health and visual status, to
detect abnormalities in the components of the visual
system, and to determine how well the person can see.
Purpose
An eye examination is performed by an ophthalmologist, (M.D. or D.O. -doctor of osteopathy), or an
optometrist (O.D.) to determine if there are any preexisting or potential vision problems. Eye exams may
also reveal the presence of many non-eye diseases.
Many systemic diseases can affect the eyes, and since
the blood vessels on the retina are observed during the
exam, certain problems may be uncovered (e.g., high
blood pressure or diabetes).
Infants should be examined by a physician to
detect any physical abnormalities. Frequency of eye
exams then generally differs with age and the health of
the person. Eye exams can be performed in infants,
and if a problem is noted the infant can be seen, generally by a pediatric ophthalmologist. A child with no
symptoms should have an eye exam at age three. Early
exams are important because permanent decreases in
vision (e.g., amblyopia, also called lazy eye) can occur
if not treated early (usually by ages 6–9). Again, with
no other symptoms, the second exam should take
place before first grade. After first grade, the
American Optometric Association recommends an
eye exam every two years; ages 19–40, every two to
three years; ages 41–60, every two years; and annually
after that. However, these are recommendations for
healthy people with no risk factors. Patients should
ask their doctors how often they should come for
exams. Some patients have risk factors for eye disease
(e.g., people with diabetes or a family history of eye
disease; African Americans, who are at higher risk for
glaucoma) and may need more frequent checkups.
Also, if children seem to be having trouble in school,
problems with reading, rubbing their eyes when reading, etc., an eye exam may be necessary sooner.
Precautions
The examiner needs to know if the patient is taking any medications or has any existing health conditions. Some medications, even over-the-counter
(OTC) medications can affect vision or even interfere
with the eyedrops the doctor may use during the exam.
Certain eyedrops would not be used if the patient has
asthma, heart problems, or other conditions.
The patient may need someone to drive them
home in case the eyes were dilated. Bringing sunglasses
to the exam may also help decrease the glare from light
until the dilating drops wear off.
Description
An eye examination, given by an ophthalmologist
or optometrist, costs about $100. It may or may not be
covered by insurance. It begins with information from
the patient (case history) and continues with a set of
primary tests, plus additional specialized tests given as
needed, dictated by the outcomes of initial testing and
the patient’s age. The primary tests can be divided into
two groups, those that evaluate the physical state of
the eyes and surrounding areas, and those that measure the ability to see.
The order of the tests for the exam may differ from
doctor to doctor, however, most exams will include the
following procedures:
Information gathering and initial observations
The examiner will take eye and medical histories
that include the patient’s chief complaint, any past eye
disorders, all medications being taken (e.g., OTC medications, antibiotics, and birth control pills), any
blood relatives with eye disorders, and any systemic
disorders the patient may have. The patient should
also tell the doctor about hobbies and work conditions. This information helps in modifying prescriptions and lets the doctor know how the patient uses his
or her eyes. For example, using a computer screen vs.
construction work, the working distance of a computer screen may affect the prescription; the construction
worker needs protective eyewear.
The patient should bring their current pair of
glasses to the exam. The doctor can get the prescription from the glasses by using an instrument called a
lensometer.
Visual acuity examination
Visual acuity measures how clearly the patient can
see. It is measured for each eye separately, with and
without the current prescription. It is usually measured with a Snellen eye chart, a poster with lines of
different-sized letters, each line with a number at the
side denoting the distance from which a person with
normal vision can read that line. Other kinds of eye
charts with identifiable figures are available for children or anyone unfamiliar with the Roman alphabet.
These charts are made to be placed at a certain distance (usually 20 ft) from the person being tested. At
this distance, people with normal vision can read a
certain line (usually the lowest), marked the 20/20
line; these people are said to have 20/20 vision. For
people who can’t read the smallest line, the examiner
assigns a ratio based on the smallest line they can read.
The first number (numerator) of the ratio is the distance between the chart and the patient, and the second number (denominator) is the distance where a
person with normal vision would be able to read that
line. The ratio 20/40 means the patient can see at 20 ft.
what people with normal vision can see at 40 ft. away.
When a patient is unable to read any lines on the
chart, they are moved closer until they can read the
line with the largest letters. The acuity is still measured
the same way. A ratio of 5/200 means the person being
tested can see at 5 ft what a normal person can see
200 ft.
When a patient cannot read the chart at all, the
examiner may hold up some fingers and ask the
patient to count them at various distances, and records
the result as ‘‘counting fingers’’ at the distance of
recognition. If the patient cannot count the examiner’s
fingers at any distance, the examiner determines if the
patient can see hand movements. If so, the result is
recorded as ‘‘hand movements.’’ If not, the examiner
determines if the patient can detect light from a penlight. If the patient can detect the light but not its
direction, the result is recorded at ‘‘light perception.’’
If the patient can recognize its direction, the result is
recorded as ‘‘light projection.’’ If the patient cannot
detect the light at all, the result is recorded as ‘‘no light
perception.’’
Eye movement examination and cover tests
The examiner asks the patient to look up and
down, and to the right and left to see if the patient
can move the eyes to their full extent. The examiner
asks the patient to stare at an object, then quickly
covers one eye and notes any movement in the eye
that remains uncovered. This procedure is repeated
with the other eye. This, and another similar cover
test, helps to determine if there is an undetected eye
turn or problem with fixation. The doctor may also
have the patient look at a pen and follow it as it is
moved close to the eyes. This checks convergence.
Iris and pupil examination
The doctor checks the pupil’s response to light
(if it dilates and constricts appropriately). The iris is
viewed for symmetry and physical appearance. The
iris is checked more thoroughly later using a slit lamp.
Refractive error determination-Refraction
The examiner will determine the refractive error
and obtain a prescription for corrective lenses for
people whose visual acuity is less than 20/20. An
instrument called a phoropter, which the patient
sits behind, is generally used (sometimes the refraction can be done with a trial frame that the patient
wears). The phoropter is equipped with many lenses
that allow the examiner to test many combinations of
corrections to learn which correction allows the
patient to see the eye chart most clearly. This is the
part of the exam when the doctor usually says,
‘‘Which is better, one or two?’’ The phoropter also
contains prisms, and sometimes the doctor will intentionally make the patient see double. This may help
in determining a slight eye turn. The exam will check
vision at distance and near (reading).
A prescription for corrective lenses can also be
supplied by automated refracting devices, which measure the necessary refraction by shining a light into the
eye and observing the reflected light. Another objective way to obtain a prescription is using a hand-held
retinoscope. As in the automated method just mentioned, the doctor shines a light in the patient’s eyes
and can determine an objective prescription. This is
helpful in young children or infants.
Sometimes drops will be instilled in the patient’s
eyes before this part of the exam. The drops may relax
accommodation so that the refraction will be more
accurate. This is helpful in children and people who
are farsighted.
After the refraction and other visual status tests,
for example color tests or binocularity tests (can the
patient see 3-D, or have depth perception), the doctor
will check the health of the eyes and surrounding
areas. The main instruments used are the ophthalmoscope and the slit lamp.
Ophthalmoscopic examination
These observations are best accomplished after
dilating the pupils and require an ophthalmoscope.
The ophthalmoscope most frequently used is a called
a direct ophthalmoscope. It is a hand-held illuminated
15X multi-lens magnifier that lets the examiner view
the inside back area of the eye (fundus). The retina,
blood vessels, optic nerve, and other structures are
examined.
Slit lamp examination
The slit lamp is a microscope with a light
source that can be adjusted. This magnifies the
external and some internal structures of the eyes.
The lid and lid margin, cornea, iris, pupil, conjunctiva, sclera, and lens are examined. The slit lamp is
also used in contact lens evaluations. A little probe
called a tonometer may be used at this time to
check the pressure of the eyes. A colored eyedrop
may be instilled immediately prior to this test.
The drop has a local anesthetic so the patient
won’t feel the probe touch the eye. It is a quick
procedure.
Visual field measurement
A perimeter, the instrument for measuring visual
fields, is a hollow hemisphere, equipped with a light
source that projects dots of light over the inside surface. The patient’s head is positioned so that the eye
being tested is at the center of the sphere and (about
13 in. 33 cm) from all points on the inside surface of
the hemisphere. The patient stares straight ahead at
an image on the center of the surface and signals
whenever he or she detects a flash of light. The perimeter records which flashes are seen and which are
missed and maps the patient’s field of vision and
blindspots.
Intraocular pressure (IOP) measurement
Tonometers are used to measure IOP. Some tonometers measure pressure by expelling a puff of air
(noncontact tonometer) towards the eyeball from a
very short distance. Other tonometers are placed
directly on the cornea. The noncontact tonometers
are not as accurate as the contact tonometers and are
sometimes used for screenings.
Completing the evaluation with additional tests
Depending upon the results other testsmay be necessary. These can include, but are not limited to binocular
indirect ophthalmoscopy, gonioscopy, color tests, contrast sensitivity testing, ultasonography, and others. The
patient may have to return for additional visits.
Results
External observations
INITIAL OBSERVATIONS AND SLIT LAMP EXAM. Some
general observations the doctor may be looking for
include: head tilt; drooping eyelids (ptosis); eye turns;
red eyes (injection); eye movement; size, shape, and
color of the iris; clarity of the cornea, anterior chamber, and lens. The anterior chamber lies behind the
cornea and in front of the iris. If it appears cloudy or
if cells can be seen in it during the slit lamp exam
an inflammation may be present. A narrow anterior
chamber may put the patient at risk for glaucoma.
A clouding of the normally clear lens is called a
cataract.Internal observations
OPHTHALMOSCOPIC EXAM. The observations
include, but are not limited to the retina, blood vessels, and optic nerve. The optic nerve enters the back
of the eye and can be checked for swelling or other
problems. The blood vessels can be viewed as can the
retina. The macula is a 3–5 mm area in the back of
the eye and is responsible for central vision. The
fovea is a small area located within the macula and
is responsible for sharp vision. When a person looks
at something, they are pointing the fovea at the
object. Changes in the macular area can be observed
with the ophthalmoscope. Retinal tears or detachments can also be seen.
Visual ability
VISUAL ACUITY. The refraction will determine the
refractive status for each eye for distance and for near.
A prescription for glasses is made after taking many
things into consideration. The eye doctor may alter a
prescription based upon many factors. Different materials for glasses may be suggested. For example, polycarbonate may be suggested for children or people
active in sports because it is very impact resistant.
Bifocals, trifocals, single-vision spectacles, and contact lenses are also options.
VISUAL FIELDS. A normal visual field extends
about 608 upward, about 758 downward, about 658
toward the nose, and about 1008 toward the ear and
has one blind spot close to the center. Defects in the
visual field signify damage to the retina, optic nerve, or
the neurological visual pathway.
Seeing clearly does not necessarily mean the eyes
are healthy or that the eyes are working together as a
team. Regular checkups can detect abnormalities,
hopefully before a problem arises. The eye doctor
can suggest ways to help protect the eyes and vision
(e.g., safety goggles, ultraviolet (UV) coatings on
lenses). A person should also have an eye exam if
they notice a change in vision, eyestrain, blur, flashes
of light, a sudden onset of floaters (little dots),distortion of objects, double vision, redness, pain or
discharge.