Definition
Eyeglasses and contact lenses are devices that correct refractive errors in vision. Eyeglass lenses are
mounted in frames worn on the face, sitting mostly
on the ears and nose, so that the lenses are positioned
in front of the eyes. Contact lenses appear to be worn
in direct contact with the cornea, but they actually
float on a layer of tears that separates them from the
cornea.
Purpose
The purpose of eyeglasses and contact lenses is to
correct or improve the vision of people with nearsightedness (myopia), farsightedness (hyperopia), presbyopia, and astigmatism.
Precautions
People allergic to certain plastics should not
wear contact lenses or eyeglass frames or lenses manufactured from that type of plastic. People allergic to
nickel should not wear Flexon frames. People at risk
of being in accidents that might shatter glass lenses
should wear plastic lenses, preferably polycarbonate.
(Lenses made from polycarbonate, the same type of
plastic used for the space shuttle windshield, are
about 50 times stronger than other lens materials.)
Also, people at risk of receiving electric shock should
avoid metal frames.
People employed in certain occupations may be
prohibited from wearing contact lenses, or may be
required to wear safety eyewear over the contact
lenses. Some occupations, such as construction or
auto repair, may require safety lenses and safety
frames. Physicians and employers should be consulted
for recommendations.
Description
Eyes are examined by optometrists (O.D.) or by
ophthalmologists (M.D. or D.O.—doctor of osteopathy). Prescriptions, if necessary, are then given to
patients for glasses. The glasses are generally made
by an optician. A separate contact lens-fitting exam
is necessary if the patient wants contact lenses, because
an eyeglass prescription is not the same as a contact
lens prescription.
Eyeglasses
More than 140 million people in the United States
wear eyeglasses. People whose eyes have refractive
errors do not see clearly without glasses, because the
light emitted from the objects they are observing does
not come into focus on their retinas. For people who
are farsighted, images come into focus behind the
retina; for people who are nearsighted, images come
into focus in front of the retina.
 LENSES. Lenses work by changing the direction of
light so that images come into focus on the retina. The
greater the index of refraction of the lens material and
the greater the difference in the curvature between the
two surfaces of the lens, the greater the change in
direction of light that passes through it, and the
greater the correction.
Lenses can be unifocal, with one correction for all
distances, or they can be correct for more than one
distance (multifocal). One type of multifocal, the bifocal, has an area of the lens (usually at the bottom) that
corrects for nearby objects (about 14 in from the eyes);
the remainder of the lens corrects for distant objects
(about 20 ft from the eyes). Another type of multifocal, a trifocal, has an area in-between that corrects
for intermediate distances (usually about 28 in).
Conventional bifocals and trifocals have visible lines
between the areas of different correction; however,
lenses where the correction gradually changes from
one area to the other, without visible lines, have been
available since the 1970s. Such lenses are sometimes
called progressives or no-line bifocals.
To be suitable for eyeglass lenses, a material must be
transparent, without bubbles, and have a high index of
refraction. The greater the index of refraction, the thinner the lens can be. Lenses are made from either glass or
plastic (hard resin). The advantage of plastic is that it is
lightweight and more impact resistant than glass. The
advantage of glass is that it is scratch resistant and
provides the clearest possible vision.
Glass was the first material to be used for eyeglass
lenses, and was used for several hundred years before
plastic was introduced.
Optical-quality acrylic was introduced for eyeglass use in the early 1940s, but because it was easily
scratched, brittle, and discolored rapidly, it did
not supplant glass as the material of choice.
Furthermore, it wasn’t suitable for people with large
refractive errors. A plastic called CR-39, introduced in
the 1960s, was more suitable. Today, eyeglass wearers
can also choose between polycarbonate, which is the
most impact-resistant material available for eyewear,
and polyurethane, which has exceptional optical qualities and higher refraction than the conventional plastics even glass. Patients with high prescriptions should
ask about high index material options for their lenses.
Aspheric lenses are also useful for high prescriptions.
They are flatter and lighter than conventional lenses.
There are many lenses and lens-coating options
for individual needs, including coatings that block the
ultraviolet (UV) light or UV and blue light, which
have been found to be harmful to the eyes. Such coatings are not needed on polycarbonate lenses, which
already have UV protection. UV coatings are particularly important on sunglasses and ski goggles.
Sunglasses, when nonprescription, should be labeled
with an indication that they block out 99–100% of
both UV-A and UV-B rays.
There are anti-scratch coatings that increase the
surface hardness of lenses (an important feature when
using plastic lenses) and anti-reflective (AR) coatings
that eliminate almost all glare and allow other people
to see the eyes of the wearer. AR coatings may be
particularly helpful to people who use computers or
who drive at night. Mirror coatings that prevent other
people from seeing the wearer’s eyes are also available.
There is a whole spectrum of tints, from light tints to
darker tints, used in sunglasses. Tint, however, does
not block out UV rays, so a UV coating is needed.
Polaroid lenses that block out much of the reflected
light also allow better vision in sunny weather and are
helpful for people who enjoy boating. Photosensitive
(photochromatic) lenses that darken in the presence of
bright light are handy for people who don’t want to
carry an extra set of glasses. Photochromatic lenses are
available in glass and plastic.
 FRAMES. Frames can be made from metal or plastic, and they can be rimless. There is an almost
unlimited variety of shapes, colors, and sizes. The
type and degree of refractive correction in the lens
determine to some extent the type of frame most suitable. Some lenses are too thick to fit in metal rims,
and some large-correction prescriptions are best suited
to frames with small-area lenses.
Rimless frames are the least noticeable type, and
they are lightweight because the nosepiece and temples
are attached directly to the lenses, eliminating the
weight of the rims. They tend to not be as sturdy as
frames with rims, so they are not a good choice for
people who frequently remove their glasses and put
them on again. They are also not very suitable for
lenses that correct a high degree of farsightedness,
because such lenses are thin at the edges.
Metal frames are less noticeable than plastic, and
they are lightweight. They are available in solid gold,
gold-filled, anodized aluminum, nickel, silver, stainless steel, and now titanium and titanium alloy. Until
the late 1980s, when titanium-nickel alloy and titanium frames were introduced, metal frames were, in
general, more fragile than plastic frames. The titanium
frames, however, are very strong and lightweight. An
alloy of titanium and nickel, called Flexon, is not only
strong and lightweight, but returns to its original
shape after being twisted or dented. It is not perfect
for everyone, though, because some people are sensitive to its nickel. Flexon frames are also relatively
expensive.
Plastic frames are durable, can accommodate just
about any lens prescription, and are available in a wide
range of prices. They are also offered in a variety of
plastics (including acrylic, epoxy, cellulose acetate,
cellulose propionate, polyamide, and nylon) and in
different colors, shapes, and levels of resistance to
breakage. Epoxy frames are resilient and return to
their original shape after being deformed, so they do
not need to be adjusted as frequently as other types.
Nylon frames are almost unbreakable. They revert to
their original shape after extreme trauma and distortion; because of this property, though, they cannot be
readjusted after they are manufactured.
 FIT. The patient should have the distance between
the eyes (PD) measured, so that the optical centers of
the lenses will be in front of the patient’s pupils.
Bifocal heights also have to be measured with the
chosen frame in place and adjusted on the patient.
Again, this is so the lenses will be positioned correctly.
If not positioned correctly, the patient may experience
eyestrain or other problems. This can occur with overthe-counter reading glasses. The distance between the
lenses is for a ‘‘standard’’ person. Generally, this will
not be a problem, but if a patient is sensitive or has
more closely set eyes, for example, it may pose a
problem. Persons buying ready-made sunglasses or
reading glasses should hold them up to see if they
appear clear. They should also hold the lenses to see
an object with straight lines reflected off of the lenses.
If the lines don’t appear straight, the lenses may be
warped or inferior.
Patients may sometimes need a few days to adjust
to a new prescription; however, problems should be
reported, because the glasses may need to be
rechecked.
Contact lenses
More than 32 million people in the United States
wear these small lenses that fit on top of the cornea.
They provide a field of view unobstructed by eyeglass
frames; they do not fog up or get splattered, so it is
possible to see well while walking in the rain; and they
are less noticeable than any eyeglass style. On the
other hand, they take time to get accustomed to;
require more measurements for fitting; require many
follow-up visits to the eye doctor; can lead to complications such as infections and corneal damage; and
may not correct astigmatism as well as eyeglasses,
especially if the astigmatism is severe.
Originally, hard contact lenses were made of a
material called PMMA. Although still available, the
more common types of contact lenses are listed below:
 Rigid gas-permeable (RGP) daily-wear lenses are
made of plastic that does not absorb water but allows
oxygen to get from the atmosphere to the cornea.
(This is important because the cornea has no blood
supply and needs to get its oxygen from the atmosphere through the film of tears that moves beneath
the lens.) They must be removed and cleaned each
night.
 Rigid gas-permeable (RGP) extended-wear lenses
are made from plastic that also does not absorb
water but is more permeable to oxygen than the
plastic used for daily-wear lenses. They can be worn
up to a week.
 Daily wear soft lenses are made of plastic that is
permeable to oxygen and absorbs water; therefore,
they are soft and flexible. These lenses must be
removed and cleaned each night, and they do not
correct all vision problems. Soft lenses are easier to
get used to than rigid lenses, but are more prone to
tears and do not last as long.
 Extended-wear soft lenses are highly permeable to
oxygen, are flexible by virtue of their ability to
absorb water, and can usually be worn for up to
one week. They do not correct all vision problems.
There is more of a risk of infection with extendedwear lenses than with daily-wear lenses.
 Extended-wear disposable lenses are soft lenses worn
continually for up to six days and then discarded,
with no need for cleaning.
 Planned-replacement soft lenses are daily wear lenses
that are replaced on a regular schedule, which is
usually every two weeks, monthly, or quarterly.
They must also be cleaned.
Soft contact lenses come in a variety of materials.
There are also different kinds of RGP and soft multifocal contact lenses available. Monovision, where one
contact lens corrects for distance vision while the other
corrects for near vision, may be an option for presbyopic patients. Monovision, however, may affect
depth perception and may not be appropriate for
everyone. Contact lenses also come in a variety of
tints. Soft contacts are available that can make eyes
appear a different color. Even though such lenses have
no prescription, they must still be fitted and checked to
make sure that an eye infection does not occur. People
should never wear someone else’s contact lenses. This
can lead to infection or damage to the eye.
Tiny, surgically implanted contact lenses may one
day replace eyeglasses, contact lenses and laser surgery
for some patients with extreme nearsightedness.
Called intraocular lenses, they were still investigational in the spring of 2004, and although they are
surgically installed, they can be removed.
Researchers expected FDA approval in 2004.
Aftercare
Contact lens wearers must be examined periodically by their eye doctors to make sure that the lenses
fit properly and that there is no infection. Infection
and lenses that do not fit properly can damage the
cornea. Patients can be allergic to certain solutions
that are used to clean or lubricate the lenses. For that
reason, patients should not randomly switch products
without speaking with their doctor. Contact lens wearers should seek immediate attention if they experience
eye pain, a burning sensation, red eyes, intolerable
sensitivity to light, cloudy vision, or an inability to
keep the eyes open.
To avoid infection, it is important for contact lens
wearers to exactly follow their instructions for lens
insertion and removal, as well as cleaning. Soft contact
lens wearers should never use tap water to rinse their
lenses or to make up solutions. All contact lens
wearers should also always have a pair of glasses and a
carrying case for their contacts with them, in case the
contacts have to be removed due to eye irritation.
Risks
Wearing contact lenses increases the risk of corneal damage and eye infections.
Normal results
The normal expectation is that people will achieve
20/20 vision while wearing corrective lenses. A new
technology for customized eyeglasses patented in
2004 claims to achieve exceptional vision assessment
and 20/10 acuity by using wavefront measurements
and precise parameters to produce measurements
such as pupil size and distance, along with other customized lens and frame features.