Definition
Eye cancer refers to a cancerous growth in any
part of the eye. Some eye cancers are primary, while
others represent metastases from primary cancers elsewhere in the body.
All types of eye cancer are rare in comparison to
other cancerous tumors. According to the American
Cancer Society, 2,090 people in the United States will
be diagnosed with cancer of the eye or orbit in 2004,
and 180 persons will die from the disease.
Description
Eye cancers can be grouped into three basic categories according to their location in the eye: tumors of
the eyelid and conjunctiva; intraocular tumors; and
orbital tumors. This article will focus on retinoblastoma, the most common eye cancer in children, and
intraocular melanoma, the most common eye cancer
in adults.
Retinoblastoma can occur at any age but is most
often seen in children younger than five. About 200
children a year are diagnosed with it in the United
States. Retinoblastoma starts with a small tumor in
the retina, the tissue that lies at the very back of the
eye. In growing children, the retina originates from
cells called retinoblasts that grow and divide very
quickly. These cells eventually become the mature
cells of the retina when they stop growing. In the
case of retinoblastoma the retinoblasts don’t stop
growing and form a tumor that can continue to grow
and cause further complications if not treated quickly.
Retinoblastoma typically has three classifications:
intraocular, extraocular and recurrent retinoblastoma. In the intraocular form the cancer can be
found in one or both eyes but not in tissue external
of the eye. In the extraocular form the cancer has
spread outside the eye. It can spread to the tissue
surrounding the eye or it can invade other areas of
the body. In the recurrent form the cancer returns after
already being treated. It may recur in the eye, its
surrounding tissues, or elsewhere in the body.
Intraocular melanoma is a rare cancer overall, yet
it is the most common eye cancer seen in adults.
Intraocular melanoma occurs when cancer cells are
found in the uvea of the eye. The uvea includes the
iris (the colored portion of eye), the ciliary body
(an eye muscle that focuses the lens) and the choroid
(found in the back of the eye next to the retina).
Intraocular cancer of the iris usually grows slowly
and usually doesn’t spread. The tumor is seen on the
iris as a darker spot than the surrounding area.
Intraocular cancer of the choroid or ciliary body
occurs in the back of the eye. They are classified by
size with a small tumor being 2-3 mm or smaller and a
medium or large tumor being bigger than 3 mm.
Intraocular cancer can spread and become extraocular as well. If not found and treated early enough it
can spread to the surrounding tissues, the optic nerve
or into the orbit (eye socket).
Causes and symptoms
Genetics is thought to play a role in eye cancer. In
regards to retinoblastoma, it is believed that if a tumor
develops only in one eye then it isn’t hereditary.
However, if a tumor occurs in both eyes then it is
hereditary. Those who have hereditary retinoblastoma
have a rare risk of developing a tumor in the brain and
should be monitored on a regular basis.
The causes of intraocular melanoma are not fully
understood as of the early 2000s. Age is a factor as well
as genetic inheritance. In 2004, a group of ophthalmologists in Scotland identified mutations in the BRAF
gene in samples of tissue taken from conjunctival melanomas. Interestingly enough, this type of cancer is
seen most often in white people from a northern
European descent.
The symptoms of this type of cancer usually begin
with blurred vision and tenderness of the eye.
Advanced symptoms may include loss of vision. If
these symptoms persist a person should make an
appointment with an eye specialist.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of eye cancer is usually made by an
ophthalmologist, who is a doctor who specializes in
treating eye disorders. In the case of cancerous
growths, the doctor is usually able to see the tumor
through the pupil or directly on the iris if the cancer is
intraocular melanoma of the iris. Because the doctor
can usually readily see the tumor a biopsy is rarely
needed.
An ultrasound or a fluorescein angiography are
two tests doctors use to further diagnose eye cancers.
In an ultrasound sound waves are pointed at the tumor
and depending on how they reflect off the tumor the
doctor can better diagnose it. In a fluorescein angiography a fluorescent dye is injected into the patients
arm. When this dye circulates through the body and
reaches the eye a series of rapid pictures are taken
through the pupil. The tumor will show up in these
photos.
Once a diagnosis has been made, the treatment
can begin.
Treatment
The treatment depends on how far advanced the
tumor is. If the tumor is in the advanced stages and
there is little hope of regaining vision the most effective
treatment is an enucleation, the removal of the eye.
Enucleation obviously is a drastic treatment and is
avoided if possible. Other eye surgeries include the
following:
 choroidectomy: removal of part of the choroid
 iridectomy: removal of part of the iris
 iridocyclectomy: removal of parts of the ciliary body
and parts of iris
 iridotrabeculectomy: removal of parts of the supporting tissues around the cornea and iris
In eye cancer where the tumor is small and there
is a good chance that the vision will be restored less
drastic measures than the above surgeries are taken.
Radiation and chemotherapy are two courses of
treatment that help in killing off the existing tumor
and preventing its spread into other areas of the
body. Specific anticancer drugs that are used in treating melanomas of the eye include gemcitabine and
treosulfan.
Besides radiation and chemotherapy there are
other methods of treating eye cancer. Cryotherapy
uses extreme cold to destroy the cancer cells.
Thermotherapy uses heat from a laser to destroy the
cancer cells. Photocoagulation uses a laser to destroy
blood vessels that supply the tumor with nutrients. If
the tumor isn’t advanced these are good options to
treat it in order to avoid losing an eye. The chief drawback of thermotherapy is that some visual acuity may
be lost in the treated eye.
A radiation/surgical treatment for eye cancer is
brachytherapy. A small plaque with radioactive
iodine on one side and gold on the other is stitched
to the eye behind the tumor with the radioactive
iodine facing the tumor. The gold is used to shield
the other tissues from the radiation. It is left there for
a period of time depending on the dosage of radiation needed and then it is removed. Although iodine
brachytherapy is effective in treating melanoma of
the eye, it increases the patient’s risk of developing a
cataract or glaucoma.Prognosis
All forms of retinoblastoma and intraocular melanoma are treatable. Enucleation can usually be
avoided if the tumor is found early enough. In addition, primary cancers of the eye have a relatively low
mortality rate if treated promptly.
Clinical trials
As of 2004, the National Cancer Institute is sponsoring 10 clinical trials of treatments for ocular melanoma in adults and 5 trials for treatments of
retinoblastoma in children. These trials allow
researchers to investigate new types of radiation therapy and chemotherapy, new drugs and drug combinations, biological therapies, ways of combining various
types of treatment for eye cancer, side effect reduction,
and quality of life. Information on specific clinical
trials can be acquired from the National Cancer
Institute at <http://www.nci.nih.gov> or (800)
4-CANCER.
Prevention
Retinoblastoma is not preventable. In addition,
most other types of eye tumors are thought to be
partly genetic as of the early 2000s.