Definition
An eyelid disorder is any abnormal condition that
affects the eyelids.
Description
Eyelids consist of thin folds of skin, muscle, and
connective tissue. The eyelids protect the eyes and
spread tears over the front of the eyes. The inside of
the eyelids are lined with the conjunctiva of the eyelid
(the palpebral conjunctiva), and the outside of the lids
are covered with the body’s thinnest skin. Some common lid problems include the following: stye, blepharitis, chalazion, entropion, ectropion, eyelid edema, and
eyelid tumors.
Stye
A stye is an infection of one of the three types of
eyelid glands near the lid margins, at the base of the
lashes.
Chalazion
A chalazion is an enlargement of a meibomian
gland (an oil-producing gland in the eyelid), usually
not associated with an infectious agent. More likely,
the gland opening is clogged. Initially, a chalazion may
resemble a stye, but it usually grows larger. A chalazion may also be located in the middle of the lid and be
internal.
Blepharitis
Blepharitis is the inflammation of the eyelid margins, often with scales and crust. It can lead to eyelash
loss, chalazia, styes, ectropion, corneal damage, excessive tearing, and chronic conjunctivitis. Entropion
Entropion is a condition where the eyelid margin
(usually the lower one) is turned inward; the eyelashes
touch the eye and irritate the cornea.
Ectropion
Ectropion is a condition where one or both eyelid
margins turn outward, exposing both the conjunctiva
that covers the eye and the conjunctiva that lines the
eyelid.
Eyelid edema
Eyelid edema is a condition where the eyelids
contain excessive fluid.
Eyelid tumors
Eyelids are susceptible to the same skin tumors as
the skin over the rest of the body, including noncancerous tumors and cancerous tumors (basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, malignant melanoma,
and sebaceous gland carcinoma). Eyelid muscles are
susceptible to sarcoma.
Causes and symptoms
Stye
Styes are usually caused by bacterialstaphylococcal
infections. The symptoms are pain and inflammation in
one or more localized regions near the eyelid margin.
Chalazion
A chalazion is caused by a blockage in the outflow
duct of a meibomian gland. Symptoms are inflammation and swelling in the form of a round lump in the lid
that may be painful.
Blepharitis
Some cases of blepharitis are caused by bacterial
infection and some by head lice, but in some cases, the
cause is unclear. It may also be caused by an overproduction of oil by the meibomian glands.
Blepharitis can be a chronic condition that begins in
early childhood and can last throughout life.
Symptoms can include itching, burning, a feeling that
something is in the eye, inflammation, and scales or
matted, hard crusts surrounding the eyelashes.
Entropion
Entropion usually results from aging, but sometimes can be due to a congenital defect, a spastic eyelid
muscle, or a scar on the inside of the lid from surgery,
injury, or disease. It is accompanied by excessive tearing, redness, and discomfort.
Ectropion
Similar to entropion, the usual cause of ectropion
is aging. It also can be due to a spastic eyelid muscle or
a scar, as in entropion. It also can be the result of
allergies. Symptoms are excessive tearing and hardening of the eyelid conjunctiva.
Eyelid edema
Eyelid edema is most often caused by allergic
reactions, for example, allergies to eye makeup, eyedrops or other drugs, or plant allergens such as pollen.
Trichinosis, a disease caused by eating undercooked
meat, also causes eyelid edema. However, swelling can
also be caused by more serious causes, such as infection, and can lead to orbital cellulitis which can threaten vision. Symptoms can include swelling, itching,
redness, or pain.
Eyelid tumors
Tumors found on the eyelids are caused by the
same conditions that cause these tumors elsewhere on
the body. They are usually painless and may or may
not be pigmented. Some possible causes include AIDS
(Kaposi’s sarcoma) or increased exposure to ultraviolet
(UV) rays which may lead to skin cancer.
Diagnosis
An instrument called a slit lamp is generally used
to magnify the structures of the eyes. The doctor may press on the lid margin to see if oil can be expressed
from the meibomian glands. The doctor may invert
the lid to see the inside of the lid. Biopsy is used to
diagnose cancerous tumors.
Treatment
Stye
Styes are treated with warm compresses for 10–15
minutes, three to four times a day. Chloramphenicol
ointment may be used as well. Sometimes topical antibiotics may be prescribed if the infection is spreading.
Chalazion
About 25% of chalazia will disappear spontaneously, but warm compresses may speed the process.
Chloramphenicol ointment may be used as well.
Because chalazia are inside the lid, topical medications
are generally of no benefit. Medication may need to be
injected by the doctor into the chalazion or if that
doesn’t help the chalazion may need to be excised. If
what appears to be a chalazion recurs on the same site
as any previous one, the possibility of sebaceous gland
carcinoma should be investigated by biopsy.
Blepharitis
Blepharitis is treated with hot compresses, with
antibiotic ointment, and by cleaning the eyelids with a
moist washcloth and then with baby shampoo. Good
hygiene is essential. Patients can try to keep rooms
dry, such as by placing a bowl of water on top of a
radiator. Tear film supplements such as hypromellose
can help moisten the eyes when dry. If itching, soreness, or redness occurs from the tear film drops, they
should be stopped. Topical or systemic antibiotics also
may be prescribed. If the blepharitis doesn’t clear up
with treatment or if it seems to be a chronic problem,
the patient may have acne rosacea. These patients may
need to see a dermatologist as well.
Entropion and ectropion
Both entropion and ectropion can be surgically
corrected. Prior to surgery, the lower lid of entropion
can be taped down to keep the lashes off the eye, and
both can be treated with lubricating drops to keep the
cornea moist.
Eyelid edema
Patients with swollen eyelids should contact their
eye doctor. A severely swollen lid can press on the eye
and possibly increase the intraocular pressure. An
infection needs to be ruled out. Or, something as simple as an allergy to nail polish and then touching the
eyes can cause swelling. The best treatment for allergic
eyelid edema is to find and remove the substance
causing the allergy. When that is not possible, as in
the case of plant allergens, cold compresses and immunosuppresesive drugs such as corticosteroid creams
are helpful. However, steroids can cause cataracts
and increase intraocular pressure and patients must
be very careful not to get the cream in their eyes. This
should not be done unless under a doctor’s care. For
edema caused by trichinosis, the trichinosis must be
treated.
Eyelid tumors
Cancerous tumors should be removed upon discovery, and noncancerous tumors should be removed
before they become big enough to interfere with vision
or eyelid function. Eyelid tumors require special consideration because of their sensitive location. It is
important that treatment not compromise vision, eye
movement, or eyelid movement. Accordingly, eyelid
reconstruction will sometimes accompany tumor
excision.
Prognosis
The prognosis for styes and chalazia is good to
excellent. With treatment, blepharitis, ectropion, and
entropion usually have good outcomes. The prognosis
for nonmalignant tumors, basal cell carcinoma, and
squamous cell carcinoma is good once they are properly removed. Survival rate for malignant melanoma depends upon how early it was discovered and if
it was completely removed. Sebaceous carcinomas are
difficult to detect, so poor outcomes are more
frequent.
All of these eyelid disorders, if not treated, can
lead to other, possibly serious vision problems—dry
eye, astigmatism, or even vision loss, for example. An
ophthalmologist or optometrist should be consulted.
Prevention
Good lid hygiene is very important. Regular eyelid washing with baby shampoo helps prevent styes,
chalazia, blepharitis, and eyelid edema. To avoid these
problems, it’s also important to refrain from touching
and rubbing the eyes and eyelids, especially with hands
that have not just been washed.
Blepharitis is associated with dandruff, which is
caused by a kind of bacteria that is one of the causes
of blepharitis. Controlling dandruff by washing the hair,
scalp, and eyebrows with shampoo containing selenium
sulfide to kill the bacteria helps control the blepharitis.
When using anything near the eyes, it is important to
read the label or consult with a doctor first.
Avoiding allergens helps prevent allergic eyelid
edema. Staying inside as much as possible when pollen
counts are high and eliminating the use of, or at least
removing eye makeup thoroughly, or using hypoallergenic makeup may help if the person is sensitive
to those substances.
Sunscreen, UV-blocking sunglasses, and wide
brimmed hats can help prevent eyelid tumors.
Entropian and ectropian seem to be
unpreventable.