Abdominal wall defects are birth (congenital)
defects that allow the stomach or intestines to
protrude.
Description
Many unexpected and fascinating events occur
during the development of a fetus inside the womb.
The stomach and intestines begin development outside
the baby’s abdomen and only later does the abdominal
wall enclose them. Occasionally, either the umbilical
opening is too large, or it develops improperly, allow￾ing the bowels or stomach to remain outside or
squeeze through the abdominal wall.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 5
Abdominal wall defects
Causes and symptoms
There are many causes for birth defects that still
remain unclear. Presently, the cause(s) of abdominal
wall defects is unknown, and any symptoms the
mother may have to indicate that the defects are present in the fetus are nondescript.
Diagnosis
At birth, the problem is obvious, because the base
of the umbilical cord at the navel will bulge or, in
worse cases, contain viscera (internal organs). Before
birth, an ultrasound examination may detect the problem. It is always necessary in children with one birth
defect to look for others, because birth defects are
usually multiple.
Treatment
Abdominal wall defects are effectively treated
with surgical repair. Unless there are accompanying
anomalies, the surgical procedure is not overly complicated. The organs are normal, just misplaced.
However, if the defect is large, it may be difficult to
fit all the viscera into the small abdominal cavity.
Prognosis
If there are no other defects, the prognosis after
surgical repair of this condition is relatively good.
However, 10% of those with more severe or additional
abnormalities die from it. The organs themselves
are fully functional; the difficulty lies in fitting them
inside the abdomen. The condition is, in fact, a hernia
requiring only replacement and strengthening of the
passageway through which it occurred. After surgery,
increased pressure in the stretched abdomen can compromise the function of the organs inside.
Prevention
Some, but by no means all, birth defects are preventable by early and attentive prenatal care, good
nutrition, supplemental vitamins, diligent avoidance
of all unnecessary drugs and chemicals–especially
tobacco–and other elements of a healthy lifestyle.
