Definition
Abuse is defined as anything that is harmful,
injurious, or offensive. Abuse also includes excessive
and wrongful misuse of a substance. There are several
major types of abuse: physical and sexual abuse of a
child or an adult, substance abuse, elderly abuse, and
emotional abuse.
Description
Physical abuse of a child is the infliction of injury
by another person. The injuries can include punching,
kicking, biting, burning, beating, or pulling the victim’s hair. The physical abuse inflicted on a child can
result in bruises, burns, poisoning, broken bones, and
internal hemorrhages. Physical assault against an
adult primarily occurs with women, usually in the
form of domestic violence. It is estimated that approximately three million children witness domestic violence every year.
Sexual abuse of a child refers to sexual behavior
between an adult and child or between two children,
one of whom is dominant or significantly older. The
sexual behaviors can include touching breasts, genitals, and buttocks; either dressed or undressed. The
behavior also can include exhibitionism, cunnilingus,
fellatio, or penetration of the vagina or anus with
sexual organs or objects.
Pornographic photography also is used in sexual
abuse with children. Reported sex offenders are 97%
male. Reports of child pornography have increased
since with the popularity of the Internet. Females
more often are perpetrators in child-care settings,
since children may confuse sexual abuse by a female
with normal hygiene care. The 1990s and early 2000s
were rocked by reports of sexual abuse of children
committed by Catholic priests. Most of the abuse
appeared to have occurred during the 1970s and a
prominent report released early in 2004 stated that as
many as 10.667 children were sexually abused by more
than 4,300 priests. Sexual abuse by stepfathers is five
times more common than with biological fathers.
Sexual abuse of daughters by stepfathers or fathers is
the most common form of incest.
Sexual abuse also can take the form of rape. The
legal definition of rape includes only slight penile
penetration in the victim’s outer vulva area.
Complete erection and ejaculation are not necessary.
Rape is the perpetration of an act of sexual intercourse
whether:

will is overcome by force or fear (from threats or by
use of drugs).

mental impairment renders the victim incapable of
rational judgment.

if the victim is below the legal age established for
consent.
Substance abuse is an abnormal pattern of substance usage leading to significant distress or impairment. The criteria include one or more of the following
occurring within a 12-month period:
recurrent substance use resulting in failure to fulfill
obligations at home, work, or school.

using substance in situations that are physically dangerous (i.e., while driving).

recurrent substance-related legal problems.

continued usage despite recurrent social and interpersonal problems (i.e., arguments and fights with
significant other).
Abuse of the elderly is common and occurs mostly
as a result of caretaker burnout, due to the high level
of dependency frail, elderly patients usually require.
Abuse can be manifested by physical signs, fear, and
delaying or not reporting the need for advanced medical care. Elderly patients also may exhibit financial
abuse (money or possessions taken away) and
abandonment.
Emotional abuse generally continues even after
physical assaults have stopped. In most cases it is a
personally tailored form of verbal or gesture abuse
expressed to illicit a provoked response.
Causes and symptoms
Children who have been abused usually have a
variety of symptoms that encompass behavioral, emotional, and psychosomatic problems (body problems
caused by emotional or mental disturbance). Children
who have been physically abused tend to be more
aggressive, angry, hostile, depressed, and have low
self-esteem. Additionally, they exhibit fear, anxiety,
and nightmares. Severe psychological problems may
result in suicidal behavior or posttraumatic stress disorder. Physically abused children may complain of
physical illness even in the absence of a cause. They
also may suffer from eating disorders and encopresis,
or involuntary defecation caused or psychic origin.
Children who are sexually abused may exhibit abnormal sexual behavior in the form of aggressiveness and
hyperarousal. Adolescents may display promiscuity,
sexual acting out, and—in some situations—homosexual contact.
Physical abuse directed towards adults can ultimately lead to death. Approximately 50% of women
murdered in the United States were killed by a former
or current male partner. Approximately one-third of
emergency room consultations by women were
prompted due to domestic violence. Female victims
who are married also have a higher rate of internal
injuries and unconsciousness than victims of stranger
assault (mugging, robbery). Physical abuse or rape
also can occur between married persons and persons
of the same gender. Perpetrators usually sexually
assault their victims to dominate, hurt, and debase
them. It is common for physical and sexual violence
to occur at the same time. A large percentage of sexually assaulted persons were also physically abused in
the form of punching, beating, or threatening the victim with a weapon such as a gun or knife. Usually
males who are hurt and humiliated tend to physically
assault people whom they are intimately involved
with, such as spouses and/or children. Males who
assault a female tend to have experienced or witnessed
violence during childhood. They also tend to abuse
alcohol, to be sexually assaultive, and are at increased
risk for assaultive behavior directed against children.
Jealous males tend to monitor a women’s movements
and whereabouts and to isolate other sources of protection and support. They interpret their behavior as
betrayal of trust and this causes resentment and explosive anger outbursts during periods of losing control.
Males also may use aggression against females in an
effort to control and intimidate partners.
Abuse in the elderly usually occurs in the frail,
elderly community. The caretaker is usually the perpetrator. Caretaker abuse can be suspected if there is
evidence suggesting behavioral changes in the elderly
person when the caretaker is present. Additionally,
elderly abuse can be possible if there are delays
between injuries and treatment, inconsistencies
between injury and explanations, lack of hygiene or
clothing, and prescriptions not being filled.
Diagnosis
Children who are victims of domestic violence
frequently are injured attempting to protect their
mother from an abusive partner. Injuries are visible
by inspection or self-report. Physical abuse of an adult
may also be evident by inspection with visible cuts
and/or bruises or self-report.
Sexual abuse of both a child and an adult can be
diagnosed with a history from the victim. Victims can
be assessed for signs of ejaculatory evidence from the
perpetrator. Ejaculatory specimens can be retrieved
from the mouth, rectum, and clothing. Tests for sexually transmitted diseases may be performed.
Elderly abuse can be suspected if the elderly patient
demonstrates a fear of the caretaker. Additionally,
elderly abuse can be suspected if there are signs indicating intentional delay of required medical care or a
change in medical status.
Substance abuse can be suspected in a person who
continues to indulge in their drug of choice despite
recurrent negative consequences. The diagnosis can
be made after administration of a comprehensive
exam and standardized chemical abuse assessments
by a therapist.
Treatment
Children who are victims of physical or sexual
abuse typically require psychological support and
medical attention. A complaint may be filed with the
local family social services agency that will initiate
investigations. The authorities usually will follow up
the allegation or offense. Children may also be
referred for psychological evaluation and/or treatment. The victim also may be placed in foster care
pending the investigation outcome. The police also
may investigate physical and sexual abuse of an
adult. The victim may require immediate medical
care and long-term psychological treatment. It is common for children to be adversely affected by domestic
violence situations and the local family services agency
may be involved.
Substance abusers should elect treatment, either
inpatient or outpatient, depending on severity of
addiction. Long term treatment and/or medications
may be utilized to assist in abstinence. The patient
should be encouraged to participate in community
centered support groups.
Prognosis
The prognosis depends on the diagnosis.
Usually victims of physical and sexual abuse require
therapy to deal with emotional distress associated
with the incident. Perpetrators require further psychological evaluation and treatment. Victims of
abuse may have a variety of emotional problems
including depression, acts of suicide, or anxiety.
Children of sexual abuse may enter abusive relationships or have problems with intimacy as adults.
The substance abuser may experience relapses, since
the cardinal feature of all addictive disorders is a
tendency to return to symptoms. Elderly patients
may suffer from further medical problems and/or
anxiety, and in some cases neglect may precipitate
death.
Prevention
Prevention programs are geared to education and
awareness. Detection of initial symptoms or characteristic behaviors may assist in some situations. In
some cases treatment may be sought before incident.
The professional treating the abused persons must
develop a clear sense of the relationship dynamics
and the chances for continued harm.