Definition
Acetaminophen is a medicine used to relieve pain
and reduce fever.
Purpose
Acetaminophen is used to relieve many kinds of
minor aches and pains—headaches, muscle aches,
backaches, toothaches, menstrual cramps, arthritis,
and the aches and pains that often accompany colds.
This drug is available without a prescription.
Acetaminophen is sold under various brand names,
including Tylenol, Panadol, Aspirin Free Anacin, and
Bayer Select Maximum Strength Headache Pain Relief
Formula. Many multi-symptom cold, flu, and sinus
medicines also contain acetaminophen. The ingredients listing on the container should state if acetaminophen is included in the product.
Studies have shown that acetaminophen relieves
pain and reduces fever about as well as aspirin. But
differences between these two common drugs exist.
Acetaminophen is less likely than aspirin to irritate
the stomach. However, unlike aspirin, acetaminophen
does not reduce the redness, stiffness, or swelling that
accompany arthritis.
Recommended dosage
The usual dosage for adults and children age 12
and over is 325-650 mg every four to six hours as
needed. No more than 4 grams (4000 mg) should be
taken in 24 hours. Because the drug can potentially
harm the liver, people who drink alcohol in large
quantities should take considerably less acetaminophen and possibly should avoid the drug completely.
For children ages 6-11 years, the usual dose is 150-
300 mg, three to four times a day. A physician should
recommend doses for children under age 6 years.
Precautions
In 2004, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) launched an advertising campaign aimed at
educating consumers about proper use of acetaminophen and other over-the-counter pain killers. Often,
acetaminophen is hidden in many cold and flu products
and people unexpectedly overdose on the medicine.
Some cases have led to liver transplantation or death.
More than the recommended dosage of acetaminophen
should not be taken unless told to do so by a physician
or dentist.
Patients should not use acetaminophen for more
than 10 days to relieve pain (five days for children) or
for more than three days to reduce fever, unless directed to do so by a physician. If symptoms do not go
away—or if they get worse— a physician should be
contacted. Anyone who drinks three or more alcoholic
beverages a day should check with a physician before
using this drug and should never take more than the
recommended dosage. A risk of liver damage exists
from combining large amounts of alcohol and
acetaminophen. People who already have kidney or
liver disease or liver infections should also consult with
a physician before using the drug. So should women
who are pregnant or breastfeeding.
Many drugs can interact with one another. A
physician or pharmacist should be consulted before
combining acetaminophen with any other medicine.
Two different acetaminophen-containing products
should not be used at the same time.
Acetaminophen interferes with the results of some
medical tests. Avoiding the drug for a few days before
the tests may be necessary.
Side effects
Acetaminophen causes few side effects. The most
common one is lightheadedness. Some people may
experience trembling and pain in the side or the
lower back. Allergic reactions occur in some people,
but are rare. Anyone who develops symptoms such as
a rash, swelling, or difficulty breathing after taking
acetaminophen should stop taking the drug and get
immediate medical attention. Other rare side effects
include yellow skin or eyes, unusual bleeding or bruising, weakness, fatigue, bloody or black stools, bloody
or cloudy urine, and a sudden decrease in the amount
of urine.
Overdoses of acetaminophen may cause nausea,
vomiting, sweating, and exhaustion. Very large overdoses can cause liver damage. In case of an overdose,
immediate medical attention should be sought. In
2004, researchers announced that an injection to counteract the liver injury caused by acetaminophen overdose has been approved by the FDA.
Interactions
Acetaminophen may interact with a variety of
other medicines. When this happens, the effects of one
or both of the drugs may change or the risk of side
effects may be greater. Among the drugs that may
interact with acetaminophen are alcohol, nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as Motrin,
oral contraceptives, the antiseizure drug phenytoin
(Dilantin), the blood-thinning drug warfarin
(Coumadin), the cholesterol-lowering drug cholestyramine (Questran), the antibiotic Isoniazid, and zidovudine (Retrovir, AZT). A physician or pharmacist
should be consulted before combining acetaminophen
with any other prescription or nonprescription (overthe-counter) medicine.