Achondroplasia is the most common cause of
dwarfism, or significantly abnormal short stature.
Description
Achondroplasia is one of a number of chondodystrophies, in which the development of cartilage,
and therefore, bone is disturbed. The disorder
appears in approximately one in every 10,000
births. Achondroplasia is usually diagnosed at birth,
owing to the characteristic appearance of the
newborn.
Normal bone growth depends on the production of cartilage (a fibrous connective tissue). Over
time, calcium is deposited within the cartilage,
causing it to harden and become bone. In achondroplasia, abnormalities of this process prevent the
bones (especially those in the limbs) from growing
as long as they normally should, at the same time
allowing the bones to become abnormally thickened. The bones in the trunk of the body and the
skull are mostly not affected, although the opening
from the skull through which the spinal cord
passes (foramen magnum) is often narrower than
normal, and the opening (spinal canal) through
which the spinal cord runs in the back bones (vertebrae) becomes increasingly and abnormally small
down the length of the spine.
Causes and symptoms
Achondroplasia is caused by a genetic defect. It is
a dominant trait, meaning that anybody with
the genetic defect will display all the symptoms of
the disorder. A parent with the disorder has a 50%
achondroplasia can be passed on to subsequent
offspring, the majority of cases occur due to a new
mutation (change) in a gene. Interestingly enough,
the defect seen in achondroplasia is one of only a
few defects known to increase in frequency with
increasing age of the father (many genetic defects are
linked to increased age of the mother).
People with achondroplasia have abnormally
short arms and legs. Their trunk is usually of normal
size, as is their head. The appearance of short limbs
and normal head size actually makes the head
appear to be oversized. The bridge of the nose
often has a scooped out appearance termed ‘‘saddle
nose.’’ The lower back has an abnormal curvature,
or sway back. The face often displays an overly
prominent forehead, and a relative lack of development of the face in the area of the upper jaw. Because
the foramen magnum and spinal canal are abnormally narrowed, nerve damage may occur if the
spinal cord or nerves become compressed. The narrowed foramen magnum may disrupt the normal
flow of fluid between the brain and the spinal cord,
resulting in the accumulation of too much fluid in
the brain (hydrocephalus). Children with achondroplasia have a very high risk of serious and repeated
middle ear infections, which can result in hearing
loss. The disease does not affect either mental capacity, or reproductive ability.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is often made at birth due to the characteristically short limbs, and the appearance of a
large head. X-ray examination will reveal a characteristic appearance to the bones, with the bones of the
limbs appearing short in length, yet broad in width. A
number of measurements of the bones in x-ray images
will reveal abnormal proportions.
Treatment
No treatment will reverse the defect present in
achondroplasia. All patients with the disease will be
short, with abnormally proportioned limbs, trunk,
and head. Treatment of achondroplasia primarily
addresses some of the complications of the disorder,
including problems due to nerve compression, hydrocephalus, bowed legs, and abnormal curves in the
spine. Children with achondroplasia who develop
middle ear infections (acute otitis media) will require
quick treatment with antibiotics and careful monitoring in order to avoid hearing loss.
Prognosis
Achondroplasia is a disease which causes considerable deformity. However, with careful attention
paid to the development of dangerous complications
(nerve compression, hydrocephalus), most people are
in good health, and can live a normal lifespan.
Prevention
The only form of prevention is through genetic
counseling, which could help parents assess their risk
of having a child with achondroplasia.