Definition
Actinomycosis is an infection primarily caused by
the bacterium Actinomyces israelii. Infection most
often occurs in the face and neck region and is characterized by the presence of a slowly enlarging, hard,
red lump.
Description
Actinomycosis is a relatively rare infection
occurring in one out of 300,000(1/300,000) people
per year. It is characterized by the presence of a
lump or mass that often forms, draining sinus tracts
to the skin surface. Fifty percent of actinomycosis
cases are of the head and neck region (also called
‘‘lumpy jaw’’ and ‘‘cervicofacial actinomycosis’’),
15% are in the chest, 20% are in the abdomen, and
the rest are in the pelvis, heart, and brain. Men are
three times more likely to develop actinomycosis than
women.
Causes and symptoms
Actinomycosis is usually caused by the bacterium
Actinomyces israelii. This bacterium is normally present in the mouth but can cause disease if it enters
tissues following an injury. Actinomyces israelii is an
anaerobic bacterium which means it dislikes oxygen
but grows very well in deep tissues where oxygen levels
are low. Tooth extraction, tooth disease, root canal
treatment, jaw surgery, or poor dental hygiene can
allow Actinomyces israelii to cause an infection in the
head and neck region.
The main symptom of cervicofacial actinomycosis
is the presence of a hard lump on the face or neck. The
lump may or may not be red. Fever occurs in some
cases.
Diagnosis
Cervicofacial actinomycosis can be diagnosed by
a family doctor or dentist and the patient may be
referred to an oral surgeon or infectious disease
specialist. The diagnosis of actinomycosis is based
upon several things. The presence of a red lump with
draining sinuses on the head or neck is strongly
suggestive of cervicofacial actinomycosis. A recent
history of tooth extraction or signs of tooth decay or
poor dental hygiene aid in the diagnosis. Microscopic
examination of the fluid draining from the sinuses
shows the characteristic ‘‘sulfur Granules’’ (small
yellow colored material in the fluid) produced by
Actinomyces israelii. A biopsy may be performed to
remove a sample of the infected tissue. This procedure
can be performed underlocal anesthesia in the doctor’s
office. Occasionally the bacteria can be cultured
from the sinus tract fluid or from samples of the
infected tissue.
Actinomycosis in the lungs, abdomen, pelvis, or
brain can be very hard to diagnose since the symptoms
often mimic those of other diseases. Actinomycosis
of the lungs or abdomen can resemble tuberculosis
or cancer. Diagnostic x-ray results, the presence of
draining sinus tracts, and microscopic analysis
and culturing of infected tissue assist in the diagnosis.
Treatment
Actinomycosis is difficult to treat because of its
dense tissue location. Surgery is often required to
drain the lesion and/or to remove the site of infection. To kill the bacteria, standard therapy has
included large doses of penicillin given through a
vein daily for two to six weeks followed by six to
twelve months of penicillin taken by mouth.
Tetracycline, clindamycin, or erythromycin may be
used instead of penicillin. The antibiotic therapy
must be completed to ensure that the infection
does not return. However, a report in 2004 on
several cases of actinomycosis said that therapy
depends on the individual case and that many
patients today will be diagnosed in earlier stages
of the disease. Sometimes, shorter courses of antibiotic treatment are effective, with close diagnostic
x-ray monitoring. Hyperbaric oxygen (oxygen
under high pressure) therapy in combination with
the antibiotic therapy has been successful.
Prognosis
Complete recovery is achieved following treatment. If left untreated, the infection may cause localized bone destruction.
Prevention
The best prevention is to maintain good dental
hygiene.