Definition
Acupuncture is one of the main forms of treatment in traditional Chinese medicine. It involves the
use of sharp, thin needles that are inserted in the body
at very specific points. This process is believed to
adjust and alter the body’s energy flow into healthier
patterns, and is used to treat a wide variety of illnesses
and health conditions.
Purpose
The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends acupuncture as an effective treatment for over
forty medical problems, including allergies, respiratory conditions, gastrointestinal disorders, gynecological problems, nervous conditions, and disorders of
the eyes, nose and throat, and childhood illnesses,
among others. Acupuncture has been used in the
treatment of alcoholism and substance abuse. It is
an effective and low-cost treatment for headaches
and chronic pain, associated with problems like
back injuries and arthritis. It has also been used
to supplement invasive Western treatments like
chemotherapy and surgery. Acupuncture is generally
most effective when used as prevention or before a
health condition becomes acute, but it has been used
to help patients suffering from cancer and AIDS.
Acupuncture is limited in treating conditions or
traumas that require surgery or emergency care
(such as for broken bones).
Origins
The original text of Chinese medicine is the Nei
Ching, The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal
Medicine, which is estimated to be at least 2,500 years
old. Thousands of books since then have been written
on the subject of Chinese healing, and its basic philosophies spread long ago to other Asian civilizations.
Nearly all of the forms of Oriental medicine which are
used in the West today, including acupuncture, shiatsu,
acupressure massage, and macrobiotics, are part of or
have their roots in Chinese medicine. Legend has it that
acupuncture developed when early Chinese physicians
observed unpredicted effects of puncture wounds in
Chinese warriors. The oldest known text on acupuncture, the Systematic Classic of Acupuncture, dates back
to 282 A.D. Although acupuncture is its best known
technique, Chinese medicine traditionally utilizes herbal remedies, dietary therapy, lifestyle changes and
other means to treat patients.
In the early 1900s, only a few Western physicians
who had visited China were fascinated by acupuncture,
but outside of Asian-American communities it
remained virtually unknown until the 1970s, when
Richard Nixon became the first U.S. president to
visit China. On Nixon’s trip, journalists were amazed
to observe major operations being performed on
patients without the use of anesthetics. Instead,
wide-awake patients were being operated on with
only acupuncture needles inserted into them to control pain. During that time, a famous columnist for
the New York Times, James Reston, had to undergo
surgery and elected to use acupuncture instead of
pain medication, and he wrote some convincing
stories on its effectiveness.
Today, acupuncture is being practiced in all 50
states by over 9,000 practitioners, with over 4,000
MDs including it in their practices. Acupuncture has
shown notable success in treating many conditions,
and over 15 million Americans have used it as a therapy. Acupuncture, however, remains largely unsupported by the medical establishment. The American
Medical Association has been resistant to researching
it, as it is based on concepts very different from the
Western scientific model.
Several forms of acupuncture are being used
today in America. Japanese acupuncture uses extremely thin needles and does not incorporate herbal
medicine in its practice. Auricular acupuncture uses
acupuncture points only on the ear, which are
believed to stimulate and balance internal organs.
In France, where acupuncture is very popular and
more accepted by the medical establishment, neurologist Paul Nogier developed a system of acupuncture
based on neuroendocrine theory rather than on traditional Chinese concepts, which is gaining some use
in America.
Basic ideas of Chinese medicine
Chinese medicine views the body as a small part
of the universe, and subject to universal laws and
principles of harmony and balance. Chinese medicine
does not draw a sharp line, as Western medicine does,
between mind and body. The Chinese system believes
that emotions and mental states are every bit as
influential on disease as purely physical mechanisms,
and considers factors like work, environment, lifestyle and relationships as fundamental to the overall
picture of a patient’s health. Chinese medicine also
uses very different symbols and ideas to discuss the
body and health. While Western medicine typically
describes health in terms of measurable physical
processes made up of chemical reactions, the Chinese
use ideas like yin and yang, chi, the organ system, and
the five elements to describe health and the body. To
understand the ideas behind acupuncture, it is worthwhile to introduce some of these basic terms.
YIN AND YANG. According to Chinese philosophy,
the universe and the body can be described by two
separate but complementary principles, that of yin
and yang. For example, in temperature, yin is cold
and yang is hot. In gender, yin is female and yang is
male. In activity, yin is passive and yang is active. In
light, yin is dark and yang is bright; in direction yin is
inward and downward and yang is outward and up,
and so on. Nothing is ever completely yin or yang, but
a combination of the two. These two principles are
always interacting, opposing, and influencing each
other. The goal of Chinese medicine is not to eliminate
either yin or yang, but to allow the two to balance each
other and exist harmoniously together. For instance, if
a person suffers from symptoms of high blood pressure,
the Chinese system would say that the heart organ
might have too much yang, and would recommend
methods either to reduce the yang or to increase the
yin of the heart, depending on the other symptoms and
organs in the body. Thus, acupuncture therapies seek to
either increase or reduce yang, or increase or reduce yin
in particular regions of the body.
CHI. Another fundamental concept of Chinese
medicine is that of chi (pronounced chee, also spelled
qi). Chi is the fundamental life energy of the universe.
It is invisible and is found in the environment in the
air, water, food and sunlight. In the body, it is the
invisible vital force that creates and animates life.
We are all born with inherited amounts of chi, and
we also get acquired chi from the food we eat and the
air we breathe. The level and quality of a person’s chi
also depends on the state of physical, mental and
emotional balance. Chi travels through the body
along channels called meridians.
THE ORGAN SYSTEM. In the Chinese system, there
are twelve main organs: the lung, large intestine, stomach, spleen, heart, small intestine, urinary bladder,
kidney, liver, gallbladder, pericardium, and the ‘‘triple
warmer,’’ which represents the entire torso region.
Each organ has chi energy associated with it, and
each organ interacts with particular emotions on the
mental level. As there are twelve organs, there are
twelve types of chi which can move through the body,
and these move through twelve main channels or meridians. Chinese doctors connect symptoms to organs.
That is, symptoms are caused by yin/yang imbalances
in one or more organs, or by an unhealthy flow of chi
to or from one organ to another. Each organ has a
different profile of symptoms it can manifest.
THE FIVE ELEMENTS. Another basis of Chinese theory is that the world and body are made up of five
main elements: wood, fire, earth, metal, and water.
These elements are all interconnected, and each element either generates or controls another element. For
instance, water controls fire and earth generates metal.
Each organ is associated with one of the five elements.
The Chinese system uses elements and organs to
describe and treat conditions. For instance, the kidney
is associated with water and the heart is associated
with fire, and the two organs are related as water and
fire are related. If the kidney is weak, then there might
be a corresponding fire problem in the heart, so treatment might be made by acupuncture or herbs to cool
the heart system and/or increase energy in the kidney
system.
The Chinese have developed an intricate system of
how organs and elements are related to physical and
mental symptoms, and the above example is a very
simple one. Although this system sounds suspect to
Western scientists, some interesting parallels have
been observed. For instance, Western medicine has
observed that with severe heart problems, kidney failure often follows, but it still does not know exactly
why. In Chinese medicine, this connection between the
two organs has long been established.
MEDICAL PROBLEMS AND ACUPUNCTURE. In
Chinese medicine, disease as seen as imbalances in
the organ system or chi meridians, and the goal of
any remedy or treatment is to assist the body in reestablishing its innate harmony. Disease can be caused
by internal factors like emotions, external factors like
the environment and weather, and other factors like
injuries, trauma, diet, and germs. However, infection
is seen not as primarily a problem with germs and
viruses, but as a weakness in the energy of the body
which is allowing a sickness to occur. In Chinese medicine, no two illnesses are ever the same, as each body
has its own characteristics of symptoms and balance.
Acupuncture is used to open or adjust the flow of chi
throughout the organ system, which will strengthen
the body and prompt it to heal itself.
A VISIT TO THE ACUPUNCTURIST. The first thing
an acupuncturist will do is get a thorough idea of a
patient’s medical history and symptoms, both physical and emotional. This is done with a long questionnaire and interview. Then the acupuncturist will
examine the patient to find further symptoms, looking closely at the tongue, the pulse at various points
in the body, the complexion, general behavior,
and other signs like coughs or pains. From this, the
practitioner will be able to determine patterns of
symptoms which indicate which organs and areas
are imbalanced. Depending on the problem, the acupuncturist will insert needles to manipulate chi on
one or more of the twelve organ meridians. On these
twelve meridians, there are nearly 2,000 points which
can be used in acupuncture, with around 200 points
being most frequently used by traditional acupuncturists. During an individual treatment, one to
twenty needles may be used, depending on which
meridian points are chosen.
Acupuncture needles are always sterilized and
acupuncture is a very safe procedure. The depth of
insertion of needles varies, depending on which chi
channels are being treated. Some points barely go
beyond superficial layers of skin, while some acupuncture points require a depth of 1-3 in (2.5-7.5 cm) of
needle. The needles generally do not cause pain.
Patients sometimes report pinching sensations and
often pleasant sensations, as the body experiences
healing. Depending on the problem, the acupuncturist
might spin or move the needles, or even pass a slight
electrical current through some of them. Moxibustion
may be sometimes used, in which an herbal mixture
(moxa or mugwort) is either burned like incense on the
acupuncture point or on the end of the needle, which
is believed to stimulate chi in a particular way. Also,
acupuncturists sometimes use cupping, during which
small suction cups are placed on meridian points to
stimulate them.
How long the needles are inserted also varies.
Some patients only require a quick in and out insertion to clear problems and provide tonification
(strengthening of health), while some other conditions might require needles inserted up to an hour or
more. The average visit to an acupuncturist takes
about thirty minutes. The number of visits to the
acupuncturist varies as well, with some conditions
improved in one or two sessions and others requiring
a series of six or more visits over the course of weeks
or months.
Costs for acupuncture can vary, depending
on whether the practitioner is an MD. Initial visits
with non-MD acupuncturists can run from $50-
$100, with follow-up visits usually costing less.
Insurance reimbursement also varies widely, depending on the company and state. Regulations have been
changing often. Some states authorize Medicaid to
cover acupuncture for certain conditions, and some
states have mandated that general coverage pay
for acupuncture. Consumers should be aware of
the provisions for acupuncture in their individual
policies.
Precautions
Acupuncture is generally a very safe procedure. If
a patient is in doubt about a medical condition, more
than one physician should be consulted. Also, a
patient should always feel comfortable and confident
that their acupuncturist is knowledgable and properly
trained.
Research and general acceptance
Mainstream medicine has been slow to accept
acupuncture; although more MDs are using it, the
American Medical Association does not recognize
it as a specialty. The reason for this is that the
mechanism of acupuncture is difficult to scientifically understand or measure, such as the invisible
energy of chi in the body. Western medicine,
admitting that acupuncture works in many cases,
has theorized that the energy meridians are actually part of the nervous system and that acupuncture relieves pain by releasing endorphins, or
natural pain killers, into the bloodstream. Despite
the ambiguity in the biochemistry involved, acupuncture continues to show effectiveness in clinical
tests, from reducing pain to alleviating the symptoms of chronic illnesses, and research in acupuncture is currently growing. The Office of Alternative
Medicine of the National Institute of Health is
currently funding research in the use of acupuncture for treating depression and attention-deficit
disorder.