Definition
Acupressure is a form of touch therapy that
utilizes the principles of acupuncture and Chinese
medicine. In acupressure, the same points on the
body are used as in acupuncture, but are stimulated
with finger pressure instead of with the insertion of
needles. Acupressure is used to relieve a variety of
symptoms and pain.
Purpose
Acupressure massage performed by a therapist
can be very effective both as prevention and as a
treatment for many health conditions, including
headaches, general aches and pains, colds and flu,
arthritis, allergies, asthma, nervous tension, menstrual cramps, sinus problems, sprains, tennis elbow,
and toothaches, among others. Unlike acupuncture
which requires a visit to a professional, acupressure
can be performed by a layperson. Acupressure techniques are fairly easy to learn, and have been used to
provide quick, cost-free, and effective relief from
many symptoms. Acupressure points can also be
stimulated to increase energy and feelings of wellbeing, reduce stress, stimulate the immune system,
and alleviate sexual dysfunction.
Description
Origins
One of the oldest text of Chinese medicine is the
Huang Di, The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal
Medicine, which may be at least 2,000 years old.
Chinese medicine has developed acupuncture, acupressure, herbal remedies, diet, exercise, lifestyle changes,
and other remedies as part of its healing methods.
Nearly all of the forms of Oriental medicine that are
used in the West today, including acupuncture, acupressure, shiatsu, and Chinese herbal medicine, have
their roots in Chinese medicine. One legend has it that
acupuncture and acupressure evolved as early Chinese
healers studied the puncture wounds of Chinese warriors, noting that certain points on the body created
interesting results when stimulated. The oldest known
text specifically on acupuncture points, the Systematic
Classic of Acupuncture, dates back to 282 A.D.
Acupressure is the non-invasive form of acupuncture,
as Chinese physicians determined that stimulating
points on the body with massage and pressure could
be effective for treating certain problem
Outside of Asian-American communities, Chinese
medicine remained virtually unknown in the United
States until the 1970s, when Richard Nixon became
the first U.S. president to visit China. On Nixon’s trip,
journalists were amazed to observe major operations
being performed on patients without the use of anesthetics. Instead, wide-awake patients were being operated on, with only acupuncture needles inserted into
them to control pain. At that time, a famous columnist
for the New York Times, James Reston, had to
undergo surgery and elected to use acupuncture for
anesthesia. Later, he wrote some convincing stories
on its effectiveness. Despite being neglected by
mainstream medicine and the American Medical
Association (AMA), acupuncture and Chinese medicine became a central to alternative medicine practitioners in the United States. Today, there are millions
of patients who attest to its effectiveness, and nearly
9,000 practitioners in all 50 states.
Acupressure is practiced as a treatment by Chinese
medicine practitioners and acupuncturists, as well as
by massage therapists. Most massage schools in
American include acupressure techniques as part of
their bodywork programs. Shiatsu massage is very
closely related to acupressure, working with the same
points on the body and the same general principles,
although it was developed over centuries in Japan
rather than in China. Reflexology is a form of bodywork based on acupressure concepts. Jin Shin Do is a
bodywork technique with an increasing number of
practitioners in America that combines acupressure
and shiatsu principles with qigong, Reichian theory,
and meditation.
Acupressure and Chinese medicine
Chinese medicine views the body as a small part
of the universe, subject to laws and principles of
harmony and balance. Chinese medicine does not
make as sharp a destinction as Western medicine
does between mind and body. The Chinese system
believes that emotions and mental states are every
bit as influential on disease as purely physical
mechanisms, and considers factors like work, environment, and relationships as fundamental to a
patient’s health. Chinese medicine also uses very different symbols and ideas to discuss the body and
health as mainly physical processes composed of chemical equations and reactions, the Chinese use ideas
like yin and yang, chi, and the organ system to
describe health and the body.
Everything in the universe has properties of
yin and yang. Yin is associated with cold, female,
passive, downward, inward, dark, wet. Yang can be
described as hot, male, active, upward, outward, light,
dry, and so on. Nothing is either completely yin or
yang. These two principles always interact and affect
each other, although the body and its organs can
become imbalanced by having either too much or too
little of either.
Chi (pronounced chee, also spelled qi or ki in
Japanese shiatsu) is the fundamental life energy. It is
found in food, air, water, and sunlight, and it travels
through the body in channels called meridians. There
are 12 major meridians in the body that transport chi,
corresponding to the 12 main organs categorized by
Chinese medicine.
Disease is viewed as an imbalance of the organs
and chi in the body. Chinese medicine has developed
intricate systems of how organs are related to physical
and mental symptoms, and it has devised corresponding treatments using the meridian and pressure point
networks that are classified and numbered. The goal
of acupressure, and acupuncture, is to stimulate and
unblock the circulation of chi, by activating very specific points, called pressure points or acupoints.
Acupressure seeks to stimulate the points on the chi
meridians that pass close to the skin, as these are
easiest to unblock and manipulate with finger
pressure.
Acupressure can be used as part of a Chinese
physician’s prescription, as a session of massage therapy, or as a self-treatment for common aches and illnesses. A Chinese medicine practitioner examines a
patient very thoroughly, looking at physical, mental
and emotional activity, taking the pulse usually at the
wrists, examining the tongue and complexion, and
observing the patient’s demeanor and attitude, to get
a complete diagnosis of which organs and meridian
points are out of balance. When the imbalance is
located, the physician will recommend specific pressure points for acupuncture or acupressure. If acupressure is recommended, the patient might opt for a series
of treatments from a massage therapist.
In massage therapy, acupressurists will evaluate a
patient’s symptoms and overall health, but a massage
therapist’s diagnostic training isn’t as extensive as a
Chinese physician’s. In a massage therapy treatment, a
person usually lies down on a table or mat, with thin
clothing on. The acupressurist will gently feel and
palpate the abdomen and other parts of the body to
determine energy imbalances. Then, the therapist will
work with different meridians throughout the body,
depending on which organs are imbalanced in the
abdomen. The therapist will use different types of
finger movements and pressure on different acupoints,
depending on whether the chi needs to be increased
or dispersed at different points. The therapist observes
and guides the energy flow through the patient’s body
throughout the session. Sometimes, special herbs
(Artemesia vulgaris or moxa) may be placed on a
point to warm it, a process called moxibustion. A session of acupressure is generally a very pleasant experience, and some people experience great benefit
immediately. For more chronic conditions, several
sessions may be necessary to relieve and improve
conditions.
Acupressure massage usually costs from $30–70
per hour session. A visit to a Chinese medicine physician or acupuncturist can be more expensive, comparable to a visit to an allopathic physician if the
practitioner is an MD. Insurance reimbursement varies widely, and consumers should be aware if their
policies cover alternative treatment, acupuncture, or
massage therapy.
Self-treatment
Acupressure is easy to learn, and there are many
good books that illustrate the position of acupoints
and meridians on the body. It is also very versatile, as
it can be done anywhere, and it’s a good form of
treatment for spouses and partners to give to each
other and for parents to perform on children for
minor conditions.
While giving self-treatment or performing acupressure on another, a mental attitude of calmness
and attention is important, as one person’s energy
can be used to help another’s. Loose, thin clothing is
recommended. There are three general techniques for
stimulating a pressure point.

Tonifying is meant to strengthen weak chi, and is
done by pressing the thumb or finger into an acupoint with a firm, steady pressure, holding it for up to
two minutes.

Dispersing is meant to move stagnant or blocked
chi, and the finger or thumb is moved in a circular
motion or slightly in and out of the point for two
minutes.

Calming the chi in a pressure point utilizes the palm
to cover the point and gently stroke the area for
about two minutes.
There are many pressure points that are easily
found and memorized to treat common ailments
from headaches to colds.

For headaches, toothaches, sinus problems, and
pain in the upper body, the ‘‘LI4’’ point is recommended. It is located in the web between the thumb
and index finger, on the back of the hand. Using the
thumb and index finger of the other hand, apply a
pinching pressure until the point is felt, and hold it
for two minutes. Pregnant women should never
press this point.

To calm the nerves and stimulate digestion, find the
‘‘CV12’’ point that is four thumb widths above the
navel in the center of the abdomen. Calm the point
with the palm, using gentle stroking for several
minutes.

To stimulate the immune system, find the ‘‘TH5’’
point on the back of the forearm two thumb widths
above the wrist. Use a dispersing technique, or circular pressure with the thumb or finger, for two
minutes on each arm.

For headaches, sinus congestion, and tension, locate
the ‘‘GB20’’ points at the base of the skull in the
back of the head, just behind the bones in back of
the ears. Disperse these points for two minutes with
the fingers or thumbs. Also find the ‘‘yintang’’ point,
which is in the middle of the forehead between the
eyebrows. Disperse it with gentle pressure for two
minutes to clear the mind and to relieve headaches.
Precautions
Acupressure is a safe technique, but it is not meant
to replace professional health care. A physician should
always be consulted when there are doubts about
medical conditions. If a condition is chronic, a professional should be consulted; purely symptomatic treatment can exacerbate chronic conditions. Acupressure
should not be applied to open wounds, or where there
is swelling and inflammation. Areas of scar tissue,
blisters, boils, rashes, or varicose veins should be
avoided. Finally, certain acupressure points should
not be stimulated on people with high or low blood
pressure and on pregnant women.
Research and general acceptance
In general, Chinese medicine has been slow to
gain acceptance in the West, mainly because it rests
on ideas very foreign to the scientific model. For
instance, Western scientists have trouble with the
idea of chi, the invisible energy of the body, and the
idea that pressing on certain points can alleviate
certain conditions seems sometimes too simple for
scientists to believe.
Western scientists, in trying to account for the
action of acupressure, have theorized that chi is actually part of the neuroendocrine system of the body.
Celebrated orthopedic surgeon Robert O. Becker,
who was twice nominated for the Nobel Prize, wrote
a book on the subject called Cross Currents: The
Promise of Electromedicine; The Perils of Electropollution. By using precise electrical measuring
devices, Becker and his colleagues showed that the
body has a complex web of electromagnetic energy,
and that traditional acupressure meridians and points
contained amounts of energy that non-acupressure
points did not.
The mechanisms of acupuncture and acupressure remain difficult to document in terms of the
biochemical processes involved; numerous testimonials are the primary evidence backing up the
effectiveness of acupressure and acupuncture.
However, a body of research is growing that verifies the effectiveness in acupressure and acupuncture techniques in treating many problems and in
controlling pain.