Definition
Acute lymphangitis is a bacterial infection in the
lymphatic vessels which is characterized by painful,
red streaks below the skin surface. This is a potentially
serious infection which can rapidly spread to the
bloodstream and be fatal.
Description
Acute lymphangitis affects a critical member of
the immune system–the lymphatic system. Waste
materials from nearly every organ in the body drain
into the lymphatic vessels and are filtered in small
organs called lymph nodes. Foreign bodies, such as
bacteria or viruses, are processed in the lymph nodes
to generate an immune response to fight an infection.
In acute lymphangitis, bacteria enter the body
through a cut, scratch, insect bite, surgical wound, or
other skin injury. Once the bacteria enter the lymphatic system, they multiply rapidly and follow the lymphatic vessel like a highway. The infected lymphatic
vessel becomes inflamed, causing red streaks that are
visible below the skin surface. The growth of the bacteria occurs so rapidly that the immune system does
not respond fast enough to stop the infection.
If left untreated, the bacteria can cause tissue
destruction in the area of the infection. A pus-filled,
painful lump called an abscess may be formed in the
infected area. Cellulitis, a generalized infection of
the lower skin layers, may also occur. In addition,
the bacteria may invade the bloodstream and cause
septicemia. Lay people, for that reason, often call
the red streaks seen in the skin ‘‘blood poisoning.’’
Septicemia is a very serious illness and may be fatal.
Causes and symptoms
Acute lymphangitis is most often caused by the
bacterium Streptococcus pyogenes. This potentially
dangerous bacterium also causes strep throat, infections of the heart, spinal cord, and lungs, and in the
1990s has been called the ‘‘flesh-eating bacterium.’’
Staphylococci bacteria may also cause lymphangitis.
Although anyone can develop lymphangitis, some
people are more at risk. People who have had radical
mastectomy (removal of a breast and nearby lymph
nodes), a leg vein removed for coronary bypass surgery, or recurrent lymphangitis caused by tinea pedis
(a fungal infection on the foot) are at an increased risk
for lymphangitis.
The characteristic symptoms of acute lymphangitis are the wide, red streaks which travel from the site
of infection to the armpit or groin. The affected areas
are red, swollen, and painful. Blistering of the affected
skin may occur. The bacterial infection causes a fever
of 100-104 8F (38-40 8C). In addition, a general ill
feeling, muscle aches, headache, chills, and loss of
appetite may be felt.
Diagnosis
If lymphangitis is suspected, the person should
call his or her doctor immediately or go to an emergency room. Acute lymphangitis could be diagnosed
by the family doctor, infectious disease specialist,
or an emergency room doctor. The painful, red
streaks just below the skin surface and the high
fever are diagnostic of acute lymphangitis. A sample
of blood would be taken for culture to determine
whether the bacteria have entered the bloodstream.
A biopsy (removal of a piece of infected tissue)
sample may be taken for culture to identify which
type of bacteria is causing the infection. Diagnosis is
immediate because it is based primarily on the symptoms. Most insurance policies should cover the
expenses for the diagnosis and treatment of acute
lymphangitis.
Treatment
Because of the serious nature of this infection, treatment would begin immediately even before the bacterial
culture results were available. The only treatment for
acute lymphangitis is to give very large doses of an
antibiotic, usually penicillin, through the vein. Growing streptococcal bacteria are usually eliminated rapidly
and easily by penicillin. The antibiotic clindamycin may
be included in the treatment to kill any streptococci
which are not growing and are in a resting state.
Alternatively, a ‘‘broad spectrum’’ antibiotic may be
used which would kill many different kinds of bacteria.
Prognosis
Complete recovery is expected if antibiotic treatment is begun at an early stage of the infection.
However, if untreated, acute lymphangitis can be a
very serious and even deadly disease. Acute lymphangitis that goes untreated can spread, causing tissue
damage. Extensive tissue damage would need to be
repaired by plastic surgery. Spread of the infection
into the bloodstream could be fatal.
Prevention
Although acute lymphangitis can occur in anyone, good hygiene and general health may help to
prevent infections.