Definition
Acute stress disorder (ASD) is an anxiety disorder
characterized by a cluster of dissociative and anxiety
symptoms occurring within one month of a traumatic
event. (Dissociation is a psychological reaction to
trauma in which the mind tries to cope by ‘‘sealing
off ’’ some features of the trauma from conscious
awareness).
Description
Acute stress disorder is a new diagnostic category
that was introduced in 1994 to differentiate time-limited reactions to trauma from post-traumatic stress
disorder (PTSD).
Causes and symptoms
Acute stress disorder is caused by exposure to
trauma, which is defined as a stressor that causes
intense fear and, usually, involves threats to life or
serious injury to oneself or others. Examples are
rape, mugging, combat, natural disasters, etc.
The symptoms of stress disorder include a combining of one or more dissociative and anxiety symptoms with the avoidance of reminders of the traumatic
event. Dissociative symptoms include emotional
detachment, temporary loss of memory, depersonalization, and derealization.
Anxiety symptoms connected with acute stress
disorder include irritability, physical restlessness,
sleep problems, inability to concentrate, and being
easily startled.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of acute stress disorder is based on a
combination of the patient’s history and a physical
examination to rule out diseases that can cause
anxiety. The essential feature is a traumatic event
within one month of the onset of symptoms. Other
diagnostic criteria include:

The symptoms significantly interfere with normal
social or vocational functioning

The symptoms last between two days and four weeks.
Treatment
Treatment for acute stress disorder usually
includes a combination of antidepressant medications
and short-term psychotherapy.
Prognosis
The prognosis for recovery is influenced by the
severity and duration of the trauma, the patient’s
closeness to it, and the patient’s previous level of functioning. Favorable signs include a short time period
between the trauma and onset of symptoms, immediate
treatment, and appropriate social support. If the
patient’s symptoms are severe enough to interfere
with normal life and have lasted longer than one
month, the diagnosis may be changed to PTSD. If the
symptoms have lasted longer than one month but are
not severe enough to meet the definition of PTSD, the
diagnosis may be changed to adjustment disorder.
Patients who do not receive treatment for acute
stress disorder are at increased risk for substance abuse
or major depressive disorders.
Prevention
Traumatic events cannot usually be foreseen and,
thus, cannot be prevented. However, in theory, professional intervention soon after a major trauma might
reduce the likelihood or severity of ASD. In addition,
some symptoms of acute stress disorder result from
biochemical changes in the central nervous system,
muscles, and digestive tract that are not subject to
conscious control.