Definition
Addison’s disease is a disorder involving disrupted functioning of the part of the adrenal gland
called the cortex. This results in decreased production
of two important chemicals (hormones) normally
released by the adrenal cortex: cortisol and
aldosterone.
Description
The adrenals are two glands, each perched on the
upper part of the two kidneys. The outer part of the
gland is known as the cortex; the inner part is known
as the medulla. Each of these parts of the adrenal
gland is responsible for producing different types of
hormones.
Cortisol is a very potent hormone produced by the
adrenal cortex. It is involved in regulating the functioning of nearly every type of organ and tissue
throughout the body, and is considered to be one of
the few hormones absolutely necessary for life.
Cortisol is involved in:

the very complex processing and utilization of many
nutrients, including sugars (carbohydrates), fats, and
proteins

the normal functioning of the circulatory system and
the hear
the functioning of muscles

normal kidney function

production of blood cells

the normal processes involved in maintaining the
skeletal system

proper functioning of the brain and nerves

the normal responses of the immune system
Aldosterone, also produced by the adrenal cortex,
plays a central role in maintaining the appropriate
proportions of water and salts in the body. When
this balance is upset, the volume of blood circulating
throughout the body will fall dangerously low, accompanied by a drop in blood pressure.
Addison’s disease is also called primary adrenocortical insufficiency. In other words, some process
interferes directly with the ability of the adrenal cortex
to produce its hormones. Levels of both cortisol and
aldosterone drop, and numerous functions throughout the body are disrupted.
Addison’s disease occurs in about four in every
100,000 people. It strikes both men and women of all
ages.
Causes and symptoms
The most common cause of Addison’s disease is
the destruction and/or shrinking (atrophy) of the adrenal cortex. In about 70% of all cases, this atrophy is
believed to occur due to an autoimmune disorder. In an
autoimmune disorder, the immune system of the body,
responsible for identifying foreign invaders such as
viruses or bacteria and killing them, accidentally begins
to identify the cells of the adrenal cortex as foreign,
and destroy them. In about 20% of all cases, destruction of the adrenal cortex is caused by tuberculosis. The
remaining cases of Addison’s disease may be caused
by fungal infections, such as histoplasmosis, coccidiomycosis, and cryptococcosis, which affect the adrenal
gland by producing destructive, tumor-like masses
called granulomas; a disease called amyloidosis, in
which a starchy substance called amyloid is deposited
in abnormal places throughout the body, interfering
with the function of whatever structure it is present
within; or invasion of the adrenal glands by cancer.
In about 75% of all patients, Addison’s disease
tends to be a very gradual, slowly developing disease.
Significant symptoms are not noted until about
90% of the adrenal cortex has been destroyed. The
most common symptoms include fatigue and loss
of energy, decreased appetite, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, weight loss, muscle weakness,
dizziness when standing, dehydration, unusual areas of
darkened (pigmented) skin, and dark freckling. As the
disease progresses, the patient may appear to have
very tanned, or bronzed skin, with darkening of the
lining of the mouth, vagina, and rectum, and dark
pigmentation of the area around the nipples (aereola). As dehydration becomes more severe, the
blood pressure will continue to drop and the patient
will feel increasingly weak and light-headed. Some
patients have psychiatric symptoms, including
depression and irritability. Women lose pubic and
underarm hair, and stop having normal menstrual
periods.
When a patient becomes ill with an infection,
or stressed by an injury, the disease may suddenly and
rapidly progress, becoming life-threatening. Symptoms
of this ‘‘Addisonian crisis’’ include abnormal heart
rhythms, severe pain in the back and abdomen,
uncontrollable nausea and vomiting, a drastic drop in
blood pressure, kidney failure, and unconsciousness.
About 25% of all Addison’s disease patients are
identified due to the development of Addisonian crisis.
Diagnosis
Many patients do not recognize the slow progression of symptoms and the disease is ultimately identified when a physician notices the areas of increased
pigmentation of the skin. Once suspected, a number
of blood tests can lead to the diagnosis of Addison’s
disease. It is not sufficient to demonstrate low blood
cortisol levels, as normal levels of cortisol vary quite
widely. Instead, patients are given a testing dose of
another hormone called corticotropin (ACTH).
ACTH is produced in the body by the pituitary
gland, and normally acts by promoting growth
within the adrenal cortex and stimulating the production and release of cortisol. In Addison’s disease,
even a dose of synthetic ACTH does not increase
cortisol levels.
To distinguish between primary adrenocortical
insufficiency (Addison’s disease) and secondary adrenocortical insufficiency (caused by failure of the pituitary to produce enough ACTH), levels of ACTH in
the blood are examined. Normal or high levels of
ACTH indicate that the pituitary is working properly,
but the adrenal cortex is not responding normally
to the presence of ACTH. This confirms the diagnosis
of Addison’s disease.
Treatment
Treatment of Addison’s disease involves replacing the missing or low levels of cortisol. In the case
of Addisonian crisis, this will be achieved by injecting
a potent form of steroid preparation through a needle
placed in a vein (intravenous or IV). Dehydration
and salt loss will also be treated by administering
carefully balanced solutions through the IV.
Dangerously low blood pressure may require special
medications to safely elevate it until the steroids take
effect.
Patients with Addison’s disease will need to take a
steroid preparation (hydrocortisone) and a replacement for aldosterone (fludrocortisone) by mouth for
the rest of their lives. When a patient has an illness
which causes nausea and vomiting (such that they
cannot hold down their medications), he or she will
need to enter a medical facility where IV medications
can be administered. When a patient has any kind of
infection or injury, the normal dose of hydrocortisone
will need to be doubled.
Prognosis
Prognosis for patients appropriately treated with
hydrocortisone and aldosterone is excellent. These
patients can expect to enjoy a normal lifespan. Without
treatment, or with substandard treatment, patients
are always at risk of developing Addisonian crisis.