Definition
An adjustment disorder is a debilitating reaction,
usually lasting less than six months, to a stressful event
or situation. It is not the same thing as post-traumatic
stress disorder (PTSD), which usually occurs in reaction to a life-threatening event and can be longer
lasting.
Description
An adjustment disorder usually begins within
three months of a stressful event, and ends within six
months after the stressor stops. There are many different subtypes of adjustment disorders, including
adjustment disorder with:

depression

anxiety

mixed anxiety and depression

conduct disturbances

mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct

unspecified
Adjustment disorders are very common and can
affect anyone, regardless of gender, age, race, or lifestyle. By definition, an adjustment disorder is shortlived, unless a person is faced with a chronic recurring
crisis (such as a child who is repeatedly abused). In
such cases, the adjustment disorder may last more
than six months.
Causes and symptoms
An adjustment disorder occurs when a person
can’t cope with a stressful event and develops emotional or behavioral symptoms. The stressful event can
be anything: it might be just one isolated incident, or a
string of problems that wears the person down. The
stress might be anything from a car accident or illness,
to a divorce, or even a certain time of year (such as
Christmas or summer).
People with adjustment disorder may have a wide
variety of symptoms. How those symptoms combine
depend on the particular subtype of adjustment disorder and on the individual’s personality and psychological defenses. Symptoms normally include some
(but not all) of the following:

hopelessness

sadness

crying

anxiety

worry

headaches or stomachaches

withdrawal

inhibition

truancy

vandalism

reckless driving

fighting

other destructive acts
Diagnosis
It is extremely important that a thorough evaluation rule out other more serious mental disorders,
since the treatment for adjustment disorder may be
very different than for other mental problems.
In order to be diagnosed as a true adjustment
disorder, the level of distress must be more severe
than what would normally be expected in response to
the stressor, or the symptoms must significantly interfere with a person’s social, job, or school functioning.
Normal expression of grief, in bereavement for
instance, is not considered an adjustment disorder.
Treatment
Psychotherapy (counseling) is the treatment of
choice for adjustment disorders, since the symptoms
are an understandable reaction to a specific stress. The
type of therapy depends on the mental health expert,
but it usually is short-term treatment that focuses on
resolving the immediate problem.
Therapy usually will help clients:

develop coping skills

understand how the stressor has affected their lives

develop alternate social or recreational activities
Family or couples therapy may be helpful in some
cases. Medications are not usually used to treat adjustment disorders, although sometimes a few days or
weeks of an anti-anxiety drug can control anxiety or
sleeping problems.
Self-help groups aimed at a specific problem (such
as recovering from divorce or job loss) can be extremely helpful to people suffering from an adjustment
disorder. Social support, which is usually an important part of self-help groups, can lead to a quicker
recovery.
Prognosis
Most people recover completely from adjustment
disorders, especially if they had no previous history of
mental problems, and have a stable home life with
strong social support. People with progressive or cyclic
disorders (such as multiple sclerosis) may experience an
adjustment disorder with each exacerbation period.