Definition
Adrenal virilism is the development or premature
development of male secondary sexual characteristics
caused by male sex hormones (androgens) excessively
produced by the adrenal gland. This disorder can
occur before birth and can lead to sexual abnormalities in newborns. It can also occur in girls and women
later in life.
Description
In the normal human body, there are two adrenal
glands. They are small structures that lie on top of the
kidneys. The adrenal glands produce many hormones
that regulate body functions. These hormones include
androgens, or male hormones. Androgens are produced in normal girls and women. Sometimes, one or
both of the adrenal glands becomes enlarged or overactive, producing more than the usual amount of
androgens. The excess androgens create masculine
characteristics.
Causes and symptoms
In infants and children, adrenal virilism is usually
the result of adrenal gland enlargement that is present
at birth. This is called congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
The cause is usually a genetic problem that leads to
severe enzyme deficiencies. In rare cases, adrenal
virilism is caused by an adrenal gland tumor. The
tumor can be benign (adrenal adenoma) or cancerous
(adrenal carcinoma). Sometimes virilism is caused by a
type of tumor on a woman’s ovary (arrhenoblastoma).
Newborn girls with adrenal virilism have external
sex organs that seem to be a mixture of male and
female organs (called female pseudohermaphrodism).
Newborn boys with the disorder have enlarged external sex organs, and these organs develop at an abnormally rapid pace.
Children with congenital adrenal hyperplasia begin
growing abnormally fast, but they stop growing earlier
than normal. Later in childhood, they are typically
shorter than normal but have well-developed trunks.
Women with adrenal virilization may develop
facial hair. Typically, their menstrual cycles are infrequent or absent. They may also develop a deeper
voice, a more prominent Adam’s apple, and other
masculine signs.
Diagnosis
Endocrinologists, doctors who specialize in the
diagnosis and treatment of glandular disorders, have
the most expertise to deal with adrenal virilization.
Some doctors who treat disorders of the internal
organs (internists) and doctors who specialize in treating the reproductive system of women (gynecologists)
may also be able to help patients with this disorder.
Diagnosis involves performing many laboratory
tests on blood samples from the patient. These tests
measure the concentration of different hormones.
Different abnormalities of the adrenal gland produce
a different pattern of hormonal abnormalities. These
tests can also help determine if the problem is adrenal
or ovarian. If a tumor is suspected, special x rays may
be done to visualize the tumor in the body. Final
diagnosis may depend on obtaining a tissue sample
from the tumor (biopsy), and examining it under a
microscope in order to verify its characteristics.
Treatment
Adrenal virilism caused by adrenal hyperplasia is
treated with daily doses of a glucocorticoid. Usually
prednisone is the drug of choice, but in infants hydrocortisone is usually given. Laboratory tests are usually
needed from time to time to adjust the dosage. Girls
with pseudohermaphrodism may require surgery to
make their external sex organs appear more normal.
If a tumor is causing the disorder, the treatment will
depend on the type and location of the tumor.
Information about the tumor cell type and the spread
of the tumor is used to decide the best kind of treatment
for a particular patient. If the tumor is cancerous, the
patient will require special treatment depending on how
far the cancer has advanced. Treatment can be a combination of surgery, medications used to kill cancer cells
(chemotherapy), and x rays or other high energy rays
used to kill cancer cells (radiation therapy). Sometimes
the doctor must remove the adrenal gland and the
surrounding tissues. If the tumor is benign, then surgically removing the tumor may be the best option.
Prognosis
Ongoing glucocorticoid treatment usually controls adrenal virilism in cases of adrenal hyperplasia,
but there is no cure. If a cancerous tumor has caused
the disorder, patients have a better prognosis if they
have an early stage of cancer that is diagnosed quickly
and has not spread.