Definition
The adrenal gland scan is a nuclear medicine evaluation of the medulla (inner tissue) of the adrenal
gland.
Purpose
The adrenal glands are a pair of small organs
located just above the kidney, which contain two
types of tissue. The adrenal cortex produces hormones
that affect water balance and metabolism in the body.
The adrenal medulla produces adrenaline and noradrenaline (also called epinepherine and norepinepherine).
An adrenal gland scan is done when too much
adrenaline and noradrenaline is produced in the
body and a tumor in the adrenal gland is suspected.
One such situation in which a tumor might be suspected is when high blood pressure (hypertension)
does not respond to medication. Tumors that secrete
adrenaline and noradrenaline can also be found outside the adrenal gland. An adrenal gland scan usually
covers the abdomen, chest, and head.
Precautions
Adrenal gland scans are not recommended for
pregnant women because of the potential harm to
the developing fetus. A pregnant woman should discuss with her doctor the risks of the procedure against
the benefits of the information it can provide in evaluating her individual medical situation.
People who have recently undergone tests that use
barium must wait until the barium has been eliminated
from their system in order to obtain accurate results
from the adrenal gland scan.
Description
The adrenal gland scan takes several days. On the
first day, a radiopharmaceutical is injected intravenously into the patient. On the second, third, and
fourth day the patient is positioned under the camera
for imaging. The scanning time each day takes
approximately 30 minutes. It is essential that the
patient remain still during imaging.
Occasionally, the scanning process may involve
fewer than three days, or it may continue several
days longer. The area scanned extends from the pelvis
and lower abdomen to the lower chest. Sometimes the
upper legs, thighs, and head are also included.
Preparation
For two days before and ten days after the injection of the radiopharmaceutical, patients are given
either Lugol’s solution or potassium iodine. This prevents the thyroid from taking up radioactive iodine
and interfering with the scan.
Aftercare
The patient should not feel any adverse effects of
the test and can resume normal activity immediately.
Follow-up tests that might be ordered include a
nuclear scan of the bones or kidney, a computed
tomography scan (CT) of the adrenals, or an ultrasound of the pelvic area.
Risks
The main risk associated with this test is to the
fetus of a pregnant woman.
Normal results
Normal results will show no unusual areas of
hormone secretion and no tumors.
Abnormal results
Abnormal results will show evidence of a tumor
where there is excessive secretion of adrenaline or
noradrenaline. Over 90% of these tumors are in the
abdomen.