Definition
Adrenal gland cancers are rare cancers occuring in
the endocrine tissue of the adrenals. They are characterized by overproduction of adrenal gland hormones.
Description
Cancers of the adrenal gland are very rare. The
adrenal gland is a hormone producing endocrine gland
with two main parts, the cortex and the medulla. The
main hormone of the adrenal cortex is cortisol and the
main hormone of the adrenal medulla is epinephrine.
When tumors develop in the adrenal gland, they
secrete excess amounts of these hormones. A cancer
that arises in the adrenal cortex is called an adrenocortical carcinoma and can produce high blood pressure, weight gain, excess body hair, weakening of the
bones and diabetes. A cancer in the adrenal medulla is
called a pheochromocytoma and can cause high blood
pressure, headache, palpitations, and excessive perspiration. Although these cancers can happen at any
age, most occur in young adults.
Causes and symptoms
It is not known what causes adrenal gland cancer,
but some cases are associated with hereditary diseases.
Symptoms of adrenal cancer are related to the specific
hormones produced by that tumor. An adrenocortical
carcinoma typically secretes high amounts of cortisol,
producing Cushing’s Syndrome. This syndrome produces progressive weight gain, rounding of the face,
and increased blood pressure. Women can experience
menstrual cycle alterations and men can experience
feminization. The symptoms for pheochromocytoma
include hypertension, acidosis, unexplained fever and
weight loss. Because of the hormones produced by this
type of tumor, anxiety is often a feature also.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis for adrenal cancer usually begins with
blood tests to evaluate the hormone levels. These hormones include epinephrine, cortisol, and testosterone.
It also includes magnetic resonance imaging, and computed tomography scans to determine the extent of the
disease. Urine and blood tests can be done to detect
the high levels of hormone secreted by the tumor.
Treatment
Treatment is aimed at removing the tumor by
surgery. In some cases, this can be done by laparoscopy. Surgery is sometimes followed by chemotherapy
and/or radiation therapy. Because the surgery removes
the source of many important hormones, hormones
must be supplemented following surgery. If adrenocortical cancer recurs or has spread to other parts of
the body (metastasized), additional surgery may be
done followed by chemotherapy using the drug
mitotane.
Alternative treatment
As with any form of cancer, all conventional treatment options should be considered and applied as
ing the functioning of the entire person diagnosed with
adrenal gland cancer through homeopathic medicine,
acupuncture, vitamin and mineral supplementation,
and herbal medicine, can benefit recovery and enhance
quality of life.
Prognosis
The prognosis for adrenal gland cancer is variable. For localized pheochromocytomas the 5-year
survival rate is 95%. This rate decreases with aggressive tumors that have metastasized. The prognosis for
adrenal cortical cancer is not as good with a 5-year
survival rate of 10-35%.
Prevention
Since so little is known about the cause of adrenal
gland cancer, it is not known if it can be prevented.