Definition
Alcohol, or ethanol, is a poison with direct toxic
effects on nerve and muscle cells. Depending on
which nerve and muscle pathways are involved,
alcohol can have far-reaching effects on different
parts of the brain, peripheral nerves, and muscles,
with symptoms of memory loss, incoordination,
seizures, weakness, and sensory deficits. These different effects can be grouped into three main categories:
(1) intoxication due to the acute effects of ethanol, (2)
withdrawal syndrome from suddenly stopping drinking, and (3) disorders related to long-term or chronic
alcohol abuse. Alcohol-related neurologic disease
includes Wernicke-Korsakoff disease, alcoholic
cerebellar degeneration, alcoholic myopathy, alcoholic neuropathy, alcohol withdrawal syndrome
with seizures and delirium tremens, and fetal alcohol
syndrome.
Description
Acute excess intake of alcohol can cause drunkenness (intoxication) or even death, and chronic or longterm abuse leads to potentially irreversible damage to
virtually any level of the nervous system. Any given
patient with long-term alcohol abuse may have no
neurologic complications, a single alcohol-related disease, or multiple conditions, depending on the genes
they have inherited, how well nourished they are, and
other environmental factors, such as exposure to other
drugs or toxins.
Neurologic complications of alcohol abuse may also
result from nutritional deficiency, because alcoholics tend
to eat poorly and may become depleted of thiamine or
other vitamins important for nervous system function.
Persons who are intoxicated are also at higher risk for
head injury or for compression injuries of the peripheral
nerves. Sudden changes in blood chemistry, especially
sodium, related to alcohol abuse may cause central pontine myelinolysis, a condition of the brainstem in which
nerves lose their myelin coating. Liver disease complicating alcoholic cirrhosis may cause dementia, delirium, and
movement disorder.
Causes and symptoms
When a person drinks alcohol, it is absorbed by
blood vessels in the stomach lining and flows rapidly
throughout the body and brain, as ethanol freely
crosses the blood-brain barrier that ordinarily keeps
large molecules from escaping from the blood vessel to
the brain tissue. Drunkenness, or intoxication, may
occur at blood ethanol concentrations of as low as
50-150 mg per dL in people who don’t drink.
Sleepiness, stupor, coma, or even death from respiratory depression and low blood pressure occur at
progressively higher concentrations.
Although alcohol is broken down by the liver,
the toxic effects from a high dose of alcohol are most
likely a direct result of alcohol itself rather than of its
breakdown products. The fatal dose varies widely
because people who drink heavily develop a tolerance to the effects of alcohol with repeated use. In
addition, alcohol tolerance results in the need for
higher levels of blood alcohol to achieve intoxicating
effects, which increases the likelihood that habitual
drinkers will be exposed to high and potentially toxic
levels of ethanol. This is particularly true when binge
drinkers fail to eat, because fasting decreases the rate
of alcohol clearance and causes even higher blood
alcohol levels.
When a chronic alcoholic suddenly stops drinking, withdrawal of alcohol leads to a syndrome of
increased excitability of the central nervous system,
called delirium tremens or ‘‘DTs.’’ Symptoms begin
six to eight hours after abstinence, and are most pronounced 24-72 hours after abstinence. They include
body shaking (tremulousness), insomnia, agitation,
confusion, hearing voices or seeing images that are
not really there (such as crawling bugs), seizures,
rapid heart beat, profuse sweating, high blood pressure, and fever. Alcohol-related seizures may also
occur without withdrawal, such as during active
heavy drinking or after more than a week without
alcohol.
Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome is caused by
deficiency of the B-vitamin thiamine, and can also
be seen in people who don’t drink but have some
other cause of thiamine deficiency, such as chronic
vomiting that prevents the absorption of this vitamin.
A 2004 study demonstrated that alcohol-dependent
patients admitted to a detoxification facility had consumed significantly less thiamine than a comparison
group of healthy volunteers. Patients with this condition have the sudden onset of Wernicke encephalopathy; the symptoms include marked confusion,
delirium, disorientation, inattention, memory loss,
and drowsiness. Examination reveals abnormalities
of eye movement, including jerking of the eyes
(nystagmus) and double vision. Problems with balance make walking difficult. People may have trouble
coordinating their leg movements, but usually not
their arms. If thiamine is not given promptly,
Wernicke encephalopathy may progress to stupor,
coma, and death.
If thiamine is given and death averted, Korsakoff’s
syndrome may develop in some patients, who suffer
from memory impairment that leaves them unable to
remember events for a period of a few years before the
onset of illness (retrograde amnesia) and unable to
learn new information (anterograde amnesia). Most
patients have very limited insight into their memory
dysfunction and have a tendency to make up explanations for events they have forgotten (confabulation).
Severe alcoholism can cause cerebellar degeneration, a slowly progressive condition affecting portions
of the brain called the anterior and superior cerebellar
vermis, causing a wide-based gait, leg incoordination,
and an inability to walk heel-to-toe in tightrope fashion. The gait disturbance usually develops over several
weeks, but may be relatively mild for some time, and
then suddenly worsen after binge drinking or an unrelated illness.
Fetal alcohol syndrome occurs in infants born to
alcoholic mothers when prenatal exposure to ethanol
retards fetal growth and development. Affected
infants often have a distinctive appearance with a
thin upper lip, flat nose and mid-face, short stature
and small head size. Almost half are mentally
retarded, and most others are mildly impaired intellectually or have problems with speech, learning, and
behavior. Fetal alcohol syndrome is the leading cause
of mental retardation and many physicians warn that
there is no safe level of alcohol for a pregnant mother
to consume.
Alcoholic myopathy, or weakness secondary to
breakdown of muscle tissue, is also known as alcoholic
rhabdomyolysis or alcoholic myoglobinuria. Males
are affected by acute (sudden onset) alcoholic myopathy four times as often as females. Breakdown of
muscle tissue (myonecrosis), can come on suddenly
during binge drinking or in the first days of alcohol
withdrawal. In its mildest form, this breakdown may
cause no noticeable symptoms, but may be detected by
a temporary elevation in blood levels of an enzyme
found predominantly in muscle, the MM fraction of
creatine kinase.
The severe form of acute alcoholic myopathy is
associated with the sudden onset of muscle pain, swelling, and weakness; a reddish tinge in the urine caused
by myoglobin, a breakdown product of muscle
excreted in the urine; and a rapid rise in muscle
enzymes in the blood. Symptoms usually worsen over
hours to a few days, and then improve over the next
week to 10 days as the patient is withdrawn from
alcohol. Muscle symptoms are usually generalized,
but pain and swelling may selectively involve the
calves or other muscle groups. The muscle breakdown
of acute alcoholic myopathy may be worsened by
crush injuries, which may occur when people drink
so much that they compress a muscle group with
their body weight for a long time without moving, or
by withdrawal seizures with generalized muscle
activity.
In patients who abuse alcohol over many years,
chronic alcoholic myopathy may develop. Males and
females are equally affected. Symptoms include painless weakness of the limb muscles closest to the trunk
and the girdle muscles, including the thighs, hips,
shoulders, and upper arms. This weakness develops
gradually, over weeks or months, without symptoms
of acute muscle injury. Muscle atrophy, or decreased
bulk, may be striking. The nerves of the extremities
may also begin to break down, a condition known as
alcoholic peripheral neuropathy, which can add to the
person’s difficulty in moving.
The way in which alcohol destroys muscle tissue is
still not well understood. Proposed mechanisms
include muscle membrane changes affecting the transport of calcium, potassium, or other minerals;
impaired muscle energy metabolism; and impaired
protein synthesis. Alcohol is metabolized or broken
down primarily by the liver, with a series of chemical
reactions in which ethanol is converted to acetate.
Acetate is metabolized by skeletal muscle, and alcohol-related changes in liver function may affect skeletal muscle metabolism, decreasing the amount of
blood sugar available to muscles during prolonged
activity. Because not enough sugar is available to supply needed energy, muscle protein may be broken
down as an alternate energy source. However, toxic
effects on muscle may be a direct result of alcohol itself
rather than of its breakdown products.
Although alcoholic peripheral neuropathy may
contribute to muscle weakness and atrophy by injuring the motor nerves controlling muscle movement,
alcoholic neuropathy more commonly affects sensory
fibers. Injury to these fibers can cause tingling or burning pain in the feet, which may be severe enough to
interfere with walking. As the condition worsens, pain
decreases but numbness increases.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of alcohol-related neurologic disease depends largely on finding characteristic symptoms and signs in patients who abuse alcohol. Other
possible causes should be excluded by the appropriate
tests, which may include blood chemistry, thyroid
function tests, brain MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) or CT (computed tomography scan), and/or
cerebrospinal fluid analysis.
Acute alcoholic myopathy can be diagnosed
by finding myoglobin in the urine and increased
creatine kinase and other blood enzymes released from
injured muscle. The surgical removal of a small piece
of muscle for microscopic analysis (muscle biopsy)
shows the scattered breakdown and repair of muscle
fibers. Doctors must rule out other acquired causes of
muscle breakdown, which include the abuse of drugs
such as heroin, cocaine, or amphetamines; trauma
with crush injury; the depletion of phosphate or potassium; or an underlying defect in the metabolism of
carbohydrates or lipids. In chronic alcoholic myopathy, serum creatine kinase often is normal, and muscle
biopsy shows atrophy, or loss of muscle fibers.
Electromyography (EMG) may show features characteristic of alcoholic myopathy or neuropathy.
Treatment
Acute management of alcohol intoxication, delirium tremens, and withdrawal is primarily supportive,
to monitor and treat any cardiovascular or respiratory
failure that may develop. In delirium tremens, fever
and sweating may necessitate treatment of fluid loss
and secondary low blood pressure. Agitation may be
treated with benzodiazepinessuch as chlordiazepoxide,
beta-adrenergic antagonists such as atenolol, or alpha
2-adrenergic agonists such as clonidine. Because
Wernicke’s syndrome is rapidly reversible with thiamine, and because death may intervene if thiamine is
not given promptly, all patients admitted for acute
complications of alcohol, as well as all patients with
unexplained encephalopathy, should be given intravenous thiamine.
Withdrawal seizures typically resolve without
specific anti-epileptic drug treatment, although status
epilepticus (continual seizures occurring without interruption) should be treated vigorously. Acute alcoholic
myopathy with myoglobinuria requires monitoring
and maintenance of kidney function, and correction
of imbalances in blood chemistry including potassium,
phosphate, and magnesium levels.
Chronic alcoholic myopathy and other chronic
conditions are treated by correcting associated nutritional deficiencies and maintaining a diet adequate in
protein and carbohydrate. The key to treating any
alcohol-related disease is helping the patient overcome
alcohol addiction. Behavioral measures and social supports may be needed in patients who develop broad
problems in their thinking abilities (dementia) or
remain in a state of confusion and disorientation
(delirium). People with walking disturbances may
benefit from physical therapy and assistive devices.
Doctors may also prescribe drugs to treat the pain
associated with peripheral neuropathy.
Prognosis
Complete recovery from Wernicke’s syndrome
may follow prompt administration of thiamine.
However, repeated episodes of encephalopathy or
prolonged alcohol abuse may cause persistent dementia or Korsakoff psychosis. Most patients recover fully
from acute alcoholic myopathy within days to weeks,
but severe cases may be fatal from acute kidney failure
and disturbances in heart rhythm secondary to
increased potassium levels. Recovery from chronic
alcoholic myopathy may occur over weeks to months
of abstinence from alcohol and correction of malnutrition. Cerebellar degeneration and alcoholic neuropathy may also improve to some extent with abstinence
and balanced diet, depending on the severity and duration of the condition.
Prevention
Prevention requires abstinence from alcohol.
Persons who consume small or moderate amounts of
alcohol might theoretically help prevent nutritional
complications of alcohol use with dietary supplements
including B vitamins. However, proper nutrition cannot protect against the direct toxic effect of alcohol or
of its breakdown products. Patients with any alcoholrelated symptoms or conditions, pregnant women,
and patients with liver or neurologic disease should
abstain completely. Persons with family history of
alcoholism or alcohol-related conditions may also be
at increased risk for neurologic complications of alcohol use.