Definition
Alemtuzumab is sold as Campath in the United
States. Alemtuzumab is a humanized monoclonal
antibody that selectively binds to CD52, a protein
found on the surface of normal and malignant B and
T cells, that is used to reduce the numbers of circulating malignant cells of patients who have B-cell chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL).
Purpose
Alemtuzumab is a monoclonal antibody used to
treat B-CLL, one of the most prevalent forms of adult
chronic leukemia. It specifically binds CD52, a protein
found on the surface of essentially all B and T cells of
the immune system. By binding the CD52 protein on
the malignant B cells, the antibody targets it for
removal from the circulation. Scientists believe that
alemtuzumab triggers antibody-mediated lysis of the
B cells, a method that the immune system uses to
eliminate foreign cells.
Alemtuzumab has been approved by the FDA for
treatment of refractory B-CLL. For a patient’s disease
to be classified as refractory, both alkylating agents
and fludarabine treatment must have been tried and
failed. Thus, this drug gives patients who have tried all
approved treatments for B-CLL another option. As
most patients with B-CLL are in stage III or IV by the
time both alkylating agents and fludarabine have been
tried, the experience with alemtuzumab treatment are
primarily with those stages of the disease. In clinical
trials, about 30% of patients had a partial response to
the drug, with 2% of these being complete responses.
This antibody has been tested with limited success in the treatment of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma
(NHL) and for the preparation of patients with various immune cell malignancies for bone marrow
transplantation. There is also a clinical trial ongoing
to test the ability of this antibody to prevent rejection
in kidney transplantation.
Description
Alemtuzumab is produced in the laboratory using
genetically engineered single clones of B-cells. Like all
antibodies, it is a Y-shaped molecule can bind one
particular substance, the antigen for that monoclonal
antibody. For alemtuzumab, the antigen is CD52, a
protein found on the surface of normal and malignant
B and T cells as well as other cells of the immune and
male reproductive systems. Alemtuzumab is a humanized antibody, meaning that the regions that bind
CD52, located on the tips of the Y branches, are
derived from rat antibodies, but the rest of the antibody is human sequence. The presence of the human
sequences helps to reduce the immune response by the
patient against the antibody itself, a problem seen
when complete mouse antibodies are used for cancer
therapies. The human sequences also help to ensure
that the various cell-destroying mechanisms of the
human immune system are properly triggered with
binding of the antibody.
Alemtuzumab was approved in May of 2001 for the
treatment of refractory B-CLL. It is approved for use
alone but clinical trials have tested the ability of the antibody to be used in combination with the purine analogs
pentostatin, fludarabine, and cladribine, and rituximab,
a monoclonal antibody specific for the CD20 antigen,
another protein found on the surface of B cells.
Recommended dosage
This antibody should be administered in a gradually escalating pattern at the start of treatment and any
time administration is interrupted for seven or more
days. The recommended beginning dosage for B-CLL
patients is a daily dose of 3 mg of Campath administered as a two-hour IV infusion. Once this amount is
tolerated, the dose is increased to 10 mg per day. After
tolerating this dose, it can be increased to 30 mg, administered three days a week. Acetominophen and diphenhydramine hydrochoride are given thirty to sixty
minutes before the infusion to help reduce side effects.
Additionally, patients generally receive anti-infective medication before treatment to help minimize the
serious opportunistic infections that can result from this
treatment. Specifically, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole
(to prevent bacterial infections) and famciclovir (to prevent viral infections) were used during the clinical trial to
decrease infections, although they were not eliminated.
Precautions
Blood studies should be done on a weekly basis while
patients are receiving the alemtuzumab treatment.
Vaccination during the treatment session is not recommended, given the T cell depletion that occurs during
treatment. Furthermore, given that antibodieslike alumtuzumab can pass through the placenta to the developing
fetus andin breastmilk, use duringpregnancyand breastfeeding is not recommended unless clearly needed.
Side effects
A severe side effect of alemtuzumab treatment is
the possible depletion of one or more types of bloo
cells. Because CD52 is expressed on a patient’s normal
B and T cells, as well as on the surface of the abnormal
B cells, the treatment eliminates both normal and
cancerous cells. The treatment also seems to trigger
autoimmune reactions against various other blood
cells. This results in severe reduction of the many
circulating blood cells including red blood cells (anemia), white blood cells (neutropenia), and clotting cells
(thrombopenia). These conditions are treated with
blood transfusions. The great majority of patients
treated exhibit some type of blood cell depletion.
A second serious side effect of this drug is the
prevalence of opportunistic infections that occurs during the treatment. Serious, and sometimes fatal bacterial, viral, fungal, and protozoan infections have
been reported. Treatments to prevent pneumonia and
herpes infections reduce, but do not eliminate these
infections.
The majority of other side effects occur after or
during the first infusion of the drug. Some common
side effects of this drug include fever and chills, nausea
and vomiting, diarrhea, shortness of breath, skin rash,
and unusual fatigue. This drug can also cause low
blood pressure (hypotension).
In patients with high tumor burden (a large number of circulating malignant B cells) this drug can
cause a side effect called tumor lysis syndrome.
Thought to be due to the release of the lysed cells’
contents into the blood stream, it can cause a misbalance of urea, uric acid, phosphate, potassium, and
calcium in the urine and blood. Patients at risk for
this side effect must keep hydrated and can be given
allopurinol before infusion.
Interactions
There have been no formal drug interaction studies done for alemtuzumab.
Mi