Definition
Allergic purpura (AP) is an allergic reaction of
unknown origin causing red patches on the skin and
other symptoms. AP is also called Henoch-Schonlein
purpura, named after the two doctors who first
described it.
Description
‘‘Purpura’’ is a bleeding disorder that occurs when
capillaries rupture, allowing small amounts of blood
to accumulate in the surrounding tissues. In AP, this
occurs because the capillaries are blocked by protein
complexes formed during an abnormal immune reaction. The skin is the most obvious site of reaction, but
the joints, gastrointestinal tract, and kidneys are also
often affected.
AP affects approximately 35,000 people in the
United States each year. Most cases are children
between the ages of two and seven. Boys are affected
more often than girls, and most cases occur from late
fall to winter.
Causes and symptoms
Causes
AP is caused by a reaction involving antibodies,
special proteins of the immune system. Antibodies are
designed to bind with foreign proteins, called antigens.
In some situations, antigen-antibody complexes can
become too large to remain suspended in the bloodstream. When this occurs, they precipitate out and
become lodged in the capillaries. This can cause the
capillary to burst, allowing a local hemorrhage.
The source of the antigen causing AP is unknown.
Antigens may be introduced by bacterial or viral
infection. More than 75% of patients report having had
an infection of the throat, upper respiratory tract, or
gastrointestinal system several weeks before the onset
of AP. Other complex molecules can act as antigens
as well, including drugs such as antibiotics or vaccines.
Otherwise harmless substances that stimulate an immune
reaction are known as allergens. Drug allergens that may
cause AP include penicillin, ampicillin, erythromycin,
and quinine. Vaccines possibly linked to AP include
those for typhoid, measles, cholera, and yellow fever.
Symptoms
The onset of AP may be preceded by a headache,
fever, and loss of appetite. Most patients first develop
an itchy skin rash. The rash is red, either flat or raised,
and may be small and freckle-like. The rash may also
be larger, resembling a bruise. Rashes become purple
and then rust colored over the course of a day, and
fade after several weeks. Rashes are most common on
the buttocks, abdomen, and lower extremities. Rashes
higher on the body may also occur, especially in
younger children.
Joint pain and swelling is common, especially
in the knees and ankles. Abdominal pain occurs in
almost all patients, along with blood in the body
waste (feces). About half of all patients show blood
in the urine, low urine volume, or other signs of kidney
involvement. Kidney failure may occur due to widespread obstruction of the capillaries in the filtering
structures called glomeruli. Kidney failure develops
in about 5% of all patients, and in 15% of those with
elevated blood or protein in the urine.
Less common symptoms include prolonged headache, fever, and pain and swelling of the scrotum.
Involvement of other organ systems may lead to
heart attack (myocardial infarction), inflammation of
the pancreas (pancreatitis), intestinal obstruction, or
bowel perforation.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of AP is based on the symptoms and
their development, a careful medical history, and
blood and urine tests. X rays or computed tomography scans (CT) may be performed to assess complications in the bowel or other internal organs.
Treatment
Most cases of AP resolve completely without
treatment. Nonetheless, a hospital stay is required
because of the possibility of serious complications.
Non-aspirin pain relievers may be given for joint
pain. Corticosteroids (like prednisone) are sometimes
used, although not all specialists agree on their utility.
Kidney involvement requires monitoring and correction of blood fluids and electrolytes.
Patients with severe kidney complications may
require a kidney biopsy so that tissue can be analyzed.
Even after all other symptoms subside, elevated levels

of blood or protein in the urine may persist for months
and require regular monitoring. Hypertension or kidney failure may develop months or even years after the
acute phase of the disease. Kidney failure requires
dialysis or transplantation.
Prognosis
Most people who develop AP become better on
their own after several weeks. About half of all
patients have at least one recurrence. Cases that do
not have kidney complications usually have the best
prognosis.