Definition
Allergies are abnormal reactions of the immune
system that occur in response to otherwise harmless
substances.
Description
Allergies are among the most common of medical
disorders. It is estimated that 60 million Americans, or
more than one in every five people, suffer from some
form of allergy, with similar proportions throughout
much of the rest of the world. Allergy is the single
largest reason for school absence and is a major source
of lost productivity in the workplace.
An allergy is a type of immune reaction. Normally,
the immune system responds to foreign microorganisms or particles by producing specific proteins called
antibodies. These antibodies are capable of binding
to identifying molecules, or antigens, on the foreign
particle. This reaction between antibody and antigen
sets off a series of chemical reactions designed to protect the body from infection. Sometimes, this same
series of reactions is triggered by harmless, everyday
substances such as pollen, dust, and animal danders.
When this occurs, an allergy develops against the
offending substance (an allergen.)
Mast cells, one of the major players in allergic
reactions, capture and display a particular type of
antibody, called immunoglobulin type E (IgE) that
binds to allergens. Inside mast cells are small chemical-filled packets called granules. Granules contain a
variety of potent chemicals, including histamine.
Immunologists separate allergic reactions into
two main types: immediate hypersensitivity reactions,
which are predominantly mast cell-mediated and
occur within minutes of contact with allergen; and
delayed hypersensitivity reactions, mediated by
T cells (a type of white blood cells) and occurring
hours to days after exposure.
Inhaled or ingested allergens usually cause
immediate hypersensitivity reactions. Allergens bind
to IgE antibodies on the surface of mast cells, which
spill the contents of their granules out onto neighboring cells, including blood vessels and nerve cells.
Histamine binds to the surfaces of these other cells
through special proteins called histamine receptors.
Interaction of histamine with receptors on blood vessels causes increased leakiness, leading to the fluid
collection, swelling and increased redness. Histamine
also stimulates pain receptors, making tissue more
sensitive and irritable. Symptoms last from one to
several hours following contact.
In the upper airways and eyes, immediate hypersensitivity reactions cause the runny nose and itchy,
bloodshot eyes typical of allergic rhinitis. In the gastrointestinal tract, these reactions lead to swelling and
irritation of the intestinal lining, which causes the
cramping and diarrhea typical of food allergy.
Allergens that enter the circulation may cause hives,
angioedema, anaphylaxis, or atopic dermatitis.
Allergens on the skin usually cause delayed hypersensitivity reaction. Roving T cells contact the allergen, setting in motion a more prolonged immune
response. This type of allergic response may develop
over several days following contact with the allergen,
and symptoms may persist for a week or more.
Causes and symptoms
Allergens enter the body through four main
routes: the airways, the skin, the gastrointestinal
tract, and the circulatory system.

Airborne allergens cause the sneezing, runny nose,
and itchy, bloodshot eyes of hay fever (allergic rhinitis). Airborne allergens can also affect the lining of
the lungs, causing asthma, or conjunctivitis (pink
	eye). Exposure to cockroach allergens has been associated with the development of asthma. Airborne
allergens from household pets are another common
source of environmental exposure.

Allergens in food can cause itching and swelling of
the lips and throat, cramps, and diarrhea. When
absorbed into the bloodstream, they may cause
hives (urticaria) or more severe reactions involving
recurrent, non-inflammatory swelling of the skin,
mucous membranes, organs, and brain (angioedema). Some food allergens may cause anaphylaxis,
a potentially life-threatening condition marked by
tissue swelling, airway constriction, and drop in
blood pressure. Allergies to foods such as cow’s
milk, eggs, nuts, fish, and legumes (peanuts and soybeans) are common. Allergies to fruits and vegetables may also occur.

In contact with the skin, allergens can cause reddening, itching, and blistering, called contact dermatitis.
Skin reactions can also occur from allergens introduced through the airways or gastrointestinal tract.
This type of reaction is known as atopic dermatitis.
Dermatitis may arise from an allergic response (such
as from poison ivy), or exposure to an irritant causing nonimmune damage to skin cells (such as soap,
cold, and chemical agents).

Injection of allergens, from insect bites and stings or
drug administration, can introduce allergens directly
into the circulation, where they may cause systemwide responses (including anaphylaxis), as well as
the local ones of swelling and irritation at the injection site.
People with allergies are not equally sensitive to
all allergens. Some may have severe allergic rhinitis
but no food allergies, for instance, or be extremely
sensitive to nuts but not to any other food. Allergies
may get worse over time. For example, childhood ragweed allergy may progress to year-round dust and
pollen allergy. On the other hand, a person may lose
allergic sensitivity. Infant or childhood atopic dermatitis disappears in almost all people. More commonly,
what seems to be loss of sensitivity is instead a reduced
exposure to allergens or an increased tolerance for the
same level of symptoms.
While allergy to specific allergensis notinherited, the
likelihood of developing some type of allergy seems to be,
at least for many people. If neither parent has allergies,
the chances of a child developing allergyis approximately
10-20%; if one parent has allergies, it is 30-50%; and if
both have allergies, it is 40-75%. One source of this
genetic predisposition is in the ability to produce higher
levels of IgE in response to allergens. Those who produce
more IgE will develop a stronger allergic sensitivity.
COMMON ALLERGENS. The most common airborne allergens are the following:

plant pollens

animal fur and dander

body parts from house mites (microscopic creatures
found in all houses)

house dust

mold spores

cigarette smoke

solvents

cleaners
Common food allergens include the following:
The following types of drugs commonly cause
allergic reactions:

penicillin or other antibiotics

flu vaccines

tetanus toxoid vaccine

gamma globulin
Common causes of contact dermatitis include the
following:

poison ivy, oak, and sumac

nickel or nickel alloys

latex
Insects and other arthropods whose bites or stings
typically cause allergy include the following:

bees, wasps, and hornets

mosquitoes

fleas

scabies
Symptoms depend on the specific type of allergic
reaction. Allergic rhinitis is characterized by an itchy,
runny nose, often with a scratchy or irritated throat
due to post-nasal drip. Inflammation of the thin membrane covering the eye (allergic conjunctivitis) causes
redness, irritation, and increased tearing in the eyes.
Asthma causes wheezing, coughing, and shortness of
breath. Symptoms of food allergies depend on the
tissues most sensitive to the allergen and whether the
allergen was spread systemically by the circulatory
system. Gastrointestinal symptoms may include swelling and tingling in the lips, tongue, palate or throat;
nausea; cramping; diarrhea; and gas. Contact dermatitis is marked by reddened, itchy, weepy skin blisters,
and an eczema that is slow to heal. It sometimes has a
characteritic man-made pattern, such as a glove
allergy with clear demarkation on the hands, wrist,
and arms where the gloves are worn, or on the earlobes
by wearing earrings.
Whole body or systemic reactions may occur from
any type of allergen, but are more common following
ingestion or injection of an allergen. Skin reactions
include the raised, reddened, and itchy patches called
hives that characteristically blanch with pressure and
resolve within twenty-four hours. A deeper and more
extensive skin reaction, involving more extensive fluid
collection and pain, is called angioedema. This usually
occurs on the extremities, fingers, toes, and parts of the
head, neck, and face. Anaphylaxis is marked by airway
constriction, blood pressure drop, widespread tissue
swelling, heart rhythm abnormalities, and in some
cases, loss of consciousness. Other syptoms may
include, dizziness, weakness, seizures, coughing, flushing, or cramping. The symptoms may begin within five
minutes after exposure to the allergen up to one hour
or more later. Mast cells in the tissues and basophils in
the blood release mediators that give rise to the clinical
symptoms of this IgE-mediated hypersensitivity reaction. Commonly, this is associated with allergies to
medications, foods, and insect venoms. In some individuals, anaphylaxis can occur with exercise, plasma
exchange, hemodialysis, reaction to insulin, contrast
media used in certain types of medical tests, and rarely
during the administration of local anesthetics.
Diagnosis
Allergies can often be diagnosed by a careful medical history, matching the onset of symptoms to the
exposure to possible allergens. Allergy is suspected if
the symptoms presented are characteristic of an allergic reaction and this occurs repeatedly upon exposure
to the suspected allergen. Allergy tests can be used to
identify potential allergens, but these must be supported by eveidence of allergic responses in the
patient’s clinical history.
Skin tests
Skin tests are performed by administering a tiny
dose of the suspected allergen by pricking, scratching,
puncturing or injecting the skin. The allergen is
applied to the skin as an auqeous extract, usually on
the back, forearms, or top of the thighs. Once in the
skin, the allergen may produce a classic immune wheal
and flare response (a skin lesion with a raised, white,
compressible area surrounded by a red flare). The tests
usually begin with prick tests or patch tests that expose
the skin to small amounts of allergen to observe the
response. A positive reaction will occur on the skin
even if the allergen is at levels normally encountered in
food or in the airways. Reactions are usually evaluated
approximately fifteen minutes after exposure.
Intradermal skin tests involved injection of the allergen into the dermis of the skin. These tests are more
sensitive and are used for allergies associated with risk
of death, such as allergies to antibiotics.
Allergen-Specific IgE Measurement
Tests that measure allergen-specific IgE antibodies generally follow a basic method. The allergen is
bound to a solid support, either in the form of a
cellulose sponge, microtiter plate, or paper disk. The
patient’s serum is prepared from a blood sample and is
incubated with the solid phase. If allergen specific IgE
antibodies are present, they will bind to the solid phase
and be retained there when the rest of the serum is
washed away. Next, an labeled antibody against the
IgE is added and will bind to any IgE on the solid
phase. The excess is washed away and the levels of IgE
are determined. The commonly used RAST test (radio
allergo sorbent test) employed radio-labeled Anti-IgE
antibodies. Updated methods now incorporate the use
of enyzme-labeled antibodies in ELISA assays
(enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays).
Total Serum IgE
The total level of IgE in the serum is commonly
measured with a two-site immunometric assay. Some
research indicates that there is a higher level of total
serum IgE in allergic as compared to non-allergic
people. However, this may not always be the case as
there is considerable overlap between the two groups.
This test is useful for the diagnosis of allergic fungal
sinusitis and bronchopulmonary aspergillosis. Other
conditions that are not allergic in nature may give
rise to higher IgE levels such as smoking, AIDS, infection with parasites, and IgE myeloma.
Provocation tests
These tests involve the administration of allergen to
elicit an immune response. Provocation tests, most commonly done with airborne allergens, present the allergen
directly through the route normally involved. Delayed
allergic contact dermatitis diagnosis involves similar
methods by application of a skin patch with allergen
to induce an allergic skin reaction. Food allergen provocation tests require abstinence from the suspect allergen
for two weeks or more, followed by ingestion of a
measured amount of the test substance administered as
an opaque capsule along with a placebo control.
Provocation tests are not used if anaphylaxis is is a
concern due to the patient’s medical history.
Future diagnostic methods
Attempts have been made for direct measurement
of immune mediators such as histamine, eosinophil
cationic protein (ECP), and mast cell tryptase.
Another, somewhat controversial,test is electrodermal
testing or electro-acupuncture allergy testing. This test
has been used in Europe and is under investigation in
the United States, though not approved by the Food
and Drug Administration. An electric potential is
applied to the skin, the allergen presented, and the
electrical resistance observed for changes. This
method has not been verified.
Treatment
Avoiding allergens is the first line of defense to
reduce the possibility of an allergic attack. It is helpful
to avoid environmental irritants such as tobacco
smoke, perfumes, household cleaning agents, paints,
glues, air fresheners, and potpourri. Nitrogen dioxide
from poorly vented gas stoves, woodburning stoves,
and artificial fireplaces has also been linked to poor
asthma control. Dust mite control is particularly
important in the bedroom areas by use of allergenimpermeable covers on mattress and pillows, frequent
washing of bedding in hot water, and removal of items
that collect dust such as stuffed toys. Mold growth may
be reduced by lowering indoor humidity, repair of
house foundations to reduce indoor leaks and seepage,
and installing exhaust systems to ventilate areas where
steam is generated such as the bathroom or kitchen.
Allergic individuals should avoid pet allergens such as
saliva, body excretions, pelts, urine, or feces. For those
who insist on keeping a pet, restriction of the animal’s
activity to certain areas of the home may be beneficial.
Complete environmental control is often difficult
to accomplish, hence therapuetic interventions may
become necessary. A large number of prescription
and over-the-counter drugs are available for treatment
of immediate hypersensitivity reactions. Most of these
work by decreasing the ability of histamine to provoke
symptoms. Other drugs counteract the effects of
histamine by stimulating other systems or reducing
immune responses in general.
Antihistamines
Antihistamines block the histamine receptors on
nasal tissue, decreasing the effect of histamine released
by mast cells. They may be used after symptoms appear,
though they may be even more effective when used
preventively, before symptoms appear. Antihistamines
help reduce sneezing, itching, and rhinorrhea. A wide
variety of antihistamines are available.
Older, first generation antihistamines often produce drowsiness as a major side effect, as well as dry
mouth, tachycardia, blurred vision, constipation, and
lower the threshold for seizures. These medications
also have similar effects to a alcohol and care should
be taken when operating motor vehicles, as individuals
may not be aware that they are impaired. Such antihistamines include the following:

diphenhydramine (Benadryl and generics)

chlorpheniramine (Chlor-trimeton and generics)

brompheniramine (Dimetane and generics)

clemastine (Tavist and generics)
Newer antihistamines that do not cause drowsiness or pass the blood-brain barrier are available by
prescription and include the following:

loratidine (Claritin)

cetirizine (Zyrtec)

fexofenadine (Allegra)
Desloratadine (Clarinex) was approved in 2004 in
syrup form for children two years and older for seasonal allergies and for hives of unknown cause in children as young as six months. It is the only nonsedating
antihistamine approved as of 2004 for children as
young as six months.
Hismanal has the potential to cause serious heart
arrhythmias when taken with the antibiotic erythromycin, the antifungal drugs ketoconazole and itraconazole,
or the antimalarial drug quinine. Taking more than the
recommended dose of Hismanal can also cause
arrhythimas. Seldane (terfenadine), the original nondrowsy antihistamine, was voluntarily withdrawn from
the market by its manufacturers in early 1998 because of
this potential and because of the availability of an
equally effective, safer alternative drug, fexofenadine.
Decongestants
Decongestants constrict blood vessels to the
mucosa to counteract the effects of histamine. This
decreases the amount of blood in the nasopahryngeal
and sinus mucosa and reduces swelling. Nasal sprays
are available that can be applied directly to the nasal
lining and oral systematic preparations are available.
Decongestants are stimulants and may cause increased
heart rate and blood pressure, headaches, insomnia,
agitation, and difficulty emptying the bladder. Use of
topical decongestants for longer than several days can
cause loss of effectiveness and rebound congestion,
in which nasal passages become more severely swollen
than before treatment.
Topical corticosteroids
Topical corticosteroids reduce mucous membrane
inflammation by decreasing the amount of fluid moved
from the vascular spaces into the tissues. These medications reduce the recruitment of inflammatory cells as
well as the synthesis of cytokines. They are available by
prescription. Allergies tend to become worse as the
season progresses because the immune system becomes
sensitized to particular antigens and can produce a
faster, stronger response. Topical corticosteroids are
especially effective at reducing this seasonal sensitization because they work more slowly and last longer
than most other medication types. As a result, they
are best started before allergy season begins. Side
effects are usually mild, but may include headaches,
nosebleeds, and unpleasant taste sensations.
Bronchodilators or metered-dose inhalers (MDI)
Because allergic reactions involving the lungs
cause the airways or bronchial tubes to narrow, as in
asthma, bronchodilators, which cause the smooth muscle lining the airways to open or dilate, can be very
effective. When inhalers are used, it is important that
the patient be educated in the proper use of these
medications. The inhaler should be shaken, and the
patient should breathe out to expel air from the lungs.
The inhaler should be placed at least two fingerbreadths in front of the mouth. The medication should
be aimed at the back of the throat, and the inhaler
activated while breathing in quite slowly 3-4 seconds.
The breath should be held for at least ten seconds, and
then expelled. At least thirty to sixty seconds should
pass before the inhaler is used again. Care should be
taken to properly wash out the mouth and brush the
teeth following use, as residual medication remains in
this area with only a small amount actually reaching
the lungs. Some bronchodilators used to treat acute
asthma attacks include adrenaline, albuterol, Maxair,
Proventil, or other ‘‘adrenoceptor stimulants,’’ most
often administered as aerosols. Successfully managing
asthma and allergies can reduce the use of inhalers.
This is done through good communication between
the physician and patient, self-management with written action plans, avoiding allergy triggers, and
through the use of preventive medications such as
montelukast.
Anticholinergics
Ipratropium bromide (atrovent) and atropine sulfate are achticholinergic drugs used for the treatment
of asthma. Ipratropium is used for treating asthmatics
in emergency situations with a nebulizer.
Nonsteroidal drugs
MAST CELL STABILIZERS. Cromolyn sodium prevents the release of mast cell granules, thereby preventing the release of histamine and other chemicals
contained in them. It acts as a preventive treatment if it
is begun several weeks before the onset of the allergy
season. It can also be used for year round allergy
prevention. Cromolyn sodium is available as a nasal
spray for allergic rhinitis and in aerosol (a suspension
of particles in gas) form for asthma.
LEUKOTRIENE MODIFIERS. These medications are
useful for individuals with aspirin sensitivity, sinusitis,
polposis, urticaria. Examples include zafirlukast
(Accolate), montelukast (Singulair), and zileuton
(Zyflo). When zileuton is used, care must be taken to
measure liver enzymes.
Immunotherapy
In this form of therapy, allergen is injected into the
skin in increasing doses over a specific period of time.
This may be helpful for patients who do not respond to
medications or avoidance of allergens in the environment. This type of therapy may reduce the need for
medications. A 2004 study recommended that children
who have severe reactions to insect sting receive immunotherapy to protect them against future stings.
Treatment of contact dermatitis
An individual suffering from contact dermatitis
should initially take steps to avoid possible sources of
exposure to the offending agent. Calamine lotion
applied to affected skin can reduce irritation somewhat,
as can cold water compresses. Side effects of topical
agents may include over-drying of the skin. In the case
of acute contact dermatitis, short-term oral corticosteroid therapy may be appropriate. Moderately strong
coricosteroids can also be applied as a wrap for twentyfour hours. Health care workers are especially at risk
for hand eruptions due to glove use.
Treatment of anaphylaxis
The emergency condition of anaphylaxis is treated
with injection of adrenaline, also known as epinephrine. People who are prone to anaphylaxis because
of food or insect allergies often carry an ‘‘Epi-pen’’
containing adrenaline in a hypodermic needle. Other
medications may be given to aid the action of the epipen. Prompt injection can prevent a more serious
reaction from developing. Particular care should be
taken to assess the affected individual’s airway status,
and he or she should be placed in a recumbent pose
and vital signs determined. If a reaction resulted from
insect sting or an injection, a tourniquet may need
to be placed proximal to the area where the agent
penetrated the skin. This should then be released at
intervals of ten minutes at a time, for one to two
minutes duration. If the individual does not respond
to such interventions, then emergency treatment is
appropriate.
Alternative treatment
Any alternative treatment for allergies begins with
finding the cause and then helping the patient to avoid
or eliminate the allergen, although this is not always
possible. As with any alternative therapy, a physician
should be consulted before initiating a new form of
treatment. Education on the use of alternative agents
is critical, as they are still ‘‘drugs’’ even though they
are derived from natural sources. Various categories
of alternative remedies may be helpful in allergy treatment, including:

antihistamines: vitamin C and the bioflavonoid
hesperidin act as natural anithistamines.

decongestants: vitamin C, the homeopathic remedies Ferrum phosphoricum and Kali muriaticum
(used alternately), and the dietary supplement
N-acetylcysteine are believed to have decongestant effects.

mast cell stabilizers: the bioflavonoids quercetin and
hesperidin may help stabilize mast cells.

immunotherapy: the herbs echinacea (Echinacea
spp.) and astragalus or milk-vetch root (Astragalus
membranaceus) may possibly help to strengthen the
immune system.

bronchodilators: the herbal remedies ephedra
(Ephedra sinica, also known as ma huang in traditional Chinese medicine), khellin (Ammi visnaga) and
cramp bark (Viburnum opulus) are believed to help
open the airways.
Treatment of contact dermatitis
A variety of herbal remedies, either applied topically or taken internally, may possibly assist in the
treatment of contact dermatitis. A poultice (crushed
herbs applied directly to the affected area) made of
jewelweed (Impatiens spp.) or chickweed (Stellaria
media) may soothe the skin. A cream or wash containing calendula (Calendula officinalis), a natural antiseptic and anti-inflammatory agent, may help heal the
rash when applied topically. Homeopathic treatment
may include such remedies as Rhus toxicodendron,
Apis mellifica, or Anacardium taken internally. A
qualified homeopathic practitioner should be consulted to match the symptoms with the correct remedy.
Care should be taken with any agent taken internally.
Prognosis
Allergies can improve over time, although they
often worsen. While anaphylaxis and severe asthma
are life-threatening, other allergic reactions are not.
Learning to recognize and avoid allergy-provoking
situations allows most people with allergies to lead
normal lives.
Prevention
Avoiding allergens is the best means of limiting
allergic reactions. For food allergies, there is no effective
treatment except avoidance. By determining the allergens that are causing reactions, most people can learn to
avoid allergic reactions from food, drugs, and contact
allergens such as poison ivy or latex. The government
will help now, since passing the Food Allergen Labeling
and Consumer Protection Act in 2004. Beginning
January 1, 2006, food manufacturers will be required
to clearly state if a product contains any of the eight
major food allergens that are responsible for more than
90% of allergic reactions to foods. These are milk,
eggs, peanuts, tree nuts, fish, shellfish, wheat, and soy.
Airborne allergens are more difficult to avoid,
although keeping dust and animal dander from collecting in the house may limit exposure. Cromolyn
sodium can prevent mast cell degranulation, thereby
limiting the allergic response.
Immunotherapy, also known as desensitization or
allergy shots, alters the balance of antibody types in
the body, thereby reducing the ability of IgE to cause
allergic reactions. Immunotherapy is preceded by
allergy testing to determine the precise allergens
responsible. Injections involve very small but gradually increasing amounts of allergen, over several weeks
or months, with periodic boosters. Full benefits may
take up to several years to achieve and are not seen at
all in about one in five patients. Individuals receiving
all shots will be monitored closely following each shot
because of the small risk of anaphylaxis, a condition
that can result in difficulty breathing and a sharp drop
in blood pressure.
Other drugs, such as leukotriene modifiers, are
used to prevent asthma attacks and in the long-term
management of allergies and asthma.