Definition
Amblyopia is an uncorrectable decrease in vision in
one or both eyes with no apparent structural abnormality seen to explain it. It is a diagnosis of exclusion,
meaning that when a decrease in vision is detected,
other causes must be ruled out. Once no other cause is
found, amblyopia is the diagnosis. Generally, a difference of two lines or more (on an eye-chart test of visual
acuity) between the two eyes or a best corrected vision
of 20/30 or worse would be defined as amblyopia. For
example, if someone has 20/20 vision with the right eye
and only 20/40 with the left, and the left eye cannot
achieve better vision with corrective lenses, the left eye
is said to be amblyopic.
Description
Lazy eye is a common non-medical term used to
describe amblyopia because the eye with poorer vision
doesn’t seem to be doing its job of seeing. Amblyopia
is the most common cause of impaired vision in children, affecting nearly three out of every 100 people or
2-4% of the population. Vision is a combination of the
clarity of the images of the eyes (visual acuity) and the
processing of those images by the brain. If the images
produced by the two eyes are substantially different,
the brain may not be able to fuse the images. Instead of
seeing two different images or double vision (diplopia), the brain suppresses the blurrier image. This
suppression can lead to amblyopia. During the first
few years of life, preferring one eye over the other may
lead to poor visual development in the blurrier eye.
Causes and symptoms
Some of the major causes of amblyopia are as
follows:

Strabismus. A misalignment of the eyes (strabismus)
is the most common cause of functional amblyopia.
The two eyes are looking in two different directions at
the same time. The brain is sent two different images
and this causes confusion. Images from the misaligned
or ‘‘crossed’’ eye are turned off to avoid double vision.

Anisometropia. This is another type of functional
amblyopia. In this case, there is a difference of refractive states between the two eyes (in other words, a
difference of prescriptions between the two eyes).
For example, one eye may be more nearsighted than
the other eye, or one eye may be farsighted and the
other eye nearsighted. Because the brain cannot fuse
the two dissimilar images, the brain will suppress the
blurrier image, causing the eye to become amblyopic.

Cataract. Clouding of the lens of the eye will cause
the image to be blurrier than the other eye. The brain
‘‘prefers’’ the clearer image. The eye with the cataract
may become amblyopic.

Ptosis. This is the drooping of the upper eyelid. If
light cannot enter the eye because of the drooping lid,
the eye is essentially not being used. This can lead to
amblyopia.

Nutrition. A type of organic amblyopia in which
nutritional deficiencies or chemical toxicity may
result in amblyopia. Alcohol, tobacco, or a deficiency
in the B vitamins may result in toxic amblyopia.

Heredity. Amblyopia can run in families.
Barring the presence of strabismus or ptosis,
children may or may not show signs of amblyopia.
Children may hold their heads at an angle while trying
to favor the eye with normal vision. They may have
trouble seeing or reaching for things when approached
from the side of the amblyopic eye. Parents should
see if one side of approach is preferred by the child
or infant. If an infant’s good eye is covered, the child
may cry.
Diagnosis
Because children with outwardly normal eyes may
have amblyopia, it is important to have regular vision
screenings performed for all children. While there is
some controversy regarding the age children should
have their first vision examination, their eyes can, in
actuality, be examined at any age, even at one day of life.
Some recommend that children have their vision
checked by their pediatrician, family physician,
ophthalmologist, or optometrist at or before six
months of age. Others recommend testing by at least
the child’s fourth birthday. There may be a ‘‘critical
period’’ in the development of vision, and amblyopia
may not be treatable after age eight or nine. The earlier
amblyopia is found, the better the possible outcome.
Most physicians test vision as part of a child’s medical
examination. If there is any sign of an eye problem,
they may refer a child to an eye specialist.
There are objective methods, such as retinoscopy,
to measure the refractive status of the eyes. This can
help determine anisometropia. In retinoscopy, a handheld instrument is used to shine a light in the child’s (or
infant’s) eyes. Using hand-held lenses, a rough prescription can be obtained. Visual acuity can be determined using a variety of methods. Many different eye
charts are available (e.g., tumbling E, pictures, or
letters). In amblyopia, single letters are easier to
recognize than when a whole line is shown. This is
called the ‘‘crowding effect’’ and helps in diagnosing
amblyopia. Neutral density filters may also be held
over the eye to aid in the diagnosis. Sometimes visual
fields to determine defects in the area of vision will be
performed. Color vision testing may also be performed. Again, it must be emphasized that amblyopia
is a diagnosis of exclusion. Visual or life-threatening
problems can also cause a decrease in vision. An examination of the eyes and visual system is very important
when there is an unexplained decrease in vision.
Treatment
The primary treatment for amblyopia is occlusion
therapy. It is important to alternate patching the good
eye (forcing the amblyopic eye to work) and the
amblyopic eye. If the good eye is constantly patched,
it too may become amblyopic because of disuse. The
treatment plan should be discussed with the doctor to
fully understand how long the patch will be on. When
patched, eye exercises may be prescribed to force the
amblyopic eye to focus and work. This is called vision
therapy or vision training (eye exercises). Even after
vision has been restored in the weak eye, part-time
patching may be required over a period of years to
maintain the improvement.
While patching is necessary to get the amblyopic
eye to work, it is just as important to correct the reason
for the amblyopia. Glasses may also be worn if there
are errors in refraction. Surgery or vision training may
be necessary in the case of strabismus. Better nutrition
is indicated in some toxic amblyopias. Occasionally,
amblyopia is treated by blurring the vision in the good
eye with eye drops or lenses to force the child to use the
amblyopic eye.
Prognosis
The younger the person, the better the chance for
improvement with occlusion and vision therapy.
However, treatment may be successful in older children–even adults. Success in the treatment of amblyopia also depends upon how severe the amblyopia is,
the specific type of amblyopia, and patient compliance. It is important to diagnose and treat amblyopia
early because significant vision loss can occur if left
untreated. The best outcomes result from early diagnosis and treatment.
Prevention
To protect their child’s vision, parents must be
aware of amblyopia as a potential problem. This
awareness may encourage parents to take young children for vision exams early on in life–certainly before
school age. Proper nutrition is important in the avoidance of toxic amblyopia.