Definition
Amnesia refers to the loss of memory. Memory
loss may result from two-sided (bilateral) damage to
parts of the brain vital for memory storage, processing, or recall (the limbic system, including the hippocampus in the medial temporal lobe).
Description
Amnesia can be a symptom of several neurodegenerative diseases; however, people whose primary
symptom is memory loss (amnesiacs), typically remain
lucid and retain their sense of self. They may even be
aware that they suffer from a memory disorder.
People who experience amnesia have been instrumental in helping brain researchers determine how
the brain processes memory. Until the early 1970s,
researchers viewed memory as a single entity.
Memory of new experiences, motor skills, past events,
and previous conditioning were grouped together in
one system that relied on a specific area of the brain.
If all memory were stored in the same way, it would
be reasonable to deduce that damage to the specific
brain area would cause complete memory loss. However, studies of amnesiacs counter that theory. Such
research demonstrates that the brain has multiple systems for processing, storing, and drawing on memory.
Causes and symptoms
Amnesia has several root causes. Most are traceable to brain injury related to physical trauma, disease,
infection, drug and alcohol abuse, or reduced blood
flow to the brain (vascular insufficiency). In WernickeKorsakoff syndrome, for example, damage to the
memory centers of the brain results from the use of
alcohol or malnutrition. Infections that damage brain
tissue, including encephalitis and herpes, can also
cause amnesia. If the amnesia is thought to be of
psychological origin, it is termed psychogenic.
There are at least three general types of amnesia:

Anterograde. This form of amnesia follows brain
trauma and is characterized by the inability to
remember new information. Recent experiences and
short-term memory disappear, but victims can recall
events prior to the trauma with clarity.

Retrograde. In some ways, this form of amnesia is
the opposite of anterograde amnesia: the victim can
recall events that occurred after a trauma, but cannot
remember previously familiar information or the
events preceding the trauma.

Transient global amnesia. This type of amnesia has
no consistently identifiable cause, but researchers
have suggested that migraines or transient ischemic
attacks may be the trigger. (A transient ischemic
attack, sometimes called ‘‘a small stroke,’’ occurs
when a blockage in an artery temporarily blocks
off blood supply to part of the brain.) A victim
experiences sudden confusion and forgetfulness.
Attacks can be as brief as 30-60 minutes or can
last up to 24 hours. In severe attacks, a person is
completely disoriented and may experience retrograde amnesia that extends back several years.
While very frightening for the patient, transient
global amnesia generally has an excellent prognosis
for recovery.Diagnosis
In diagnosing amnesia and its cause, doctors look
at several factors. During a physical examination, the
doctor inquires about recent traumas or illnesses, drug
and medication history, and checks the patient’s general
health. Psychological exams may be ordered to determine the extent of amnesia and the memory system
affected. The doctor may also order imaging tests such
as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to reveal whether
the brain has been damaged, and blood work to exclude
treatable metabolic causes or chemical imbalances.
Treatment
Treatment depends on the root cause of amnesia
and is handled on an individual basis. Regardless of
cause, cognitive rehabilitation may be helpful in learning
strategies to cope with memory impairment.
Prognosis
Some types of amnesia, such as transient global
amnesia, are completely resolved and there is no permanent loss of memory. Others, such as Korsakoff
syndrome, associated with prolonged alcohol abuse
or amnesias caused by severe brain injury, may be
permanent. Depending on the degree of amnesia and
its cause, victims may be able to lead relatively normal
lives. Amnesiacs can learn through therapy to rely on
other memory systems to compensate for what is lost.
Prevention
Amnesia is only preventable in so far as brain
injury can be prevented or minimized. Common
sense approaches include wearing a helmet when bicycling or participating in potentially dangerous sports,
using automobile seat belts, and avoiding excessive
alcohol or drug use. Brain infections should be treated
swiftly and aggressively to minimize the damage due
to swelling. Victims of strokes, brain aneurysms, and
transient ischemic attacks should seek immediate
medical treatment.