Definition
Amputation is the intentional surgical removal of
a limb or body part. It is performed to remove diseased
tissue or relieve pain.
Purpose
Arms, legs, hands, feet, fingers, and toes can be
amputated. Most amputations involve small body
parts such as a finger, rather than an entire limb.
About 65,000 amputations are performed in the
United States each year.
Amputation is performed for the following reasons:

to remove tissue that no longer has an adequate
blood supply

to remove malignant tumors

because of severe trauma to the body part
The blood supply to an extremity can be cut off
because of injury to the blood vessel, hardening of
the arteries, arterial embolism, impaired circulation
as a complication of diabetes mellitus, repeated severe
infection that leads to gangrene, severe frostbite,
Raynaud’s disease, or Buerger’s disease.
More than 90% of amputations performed in the
United States are due to circulatory complications of
diabetes. Sixty to eighty percent of these operations
involve the legs or feet. Although attempts have been
made in the United States to better manage diabetes
and the foot ulcers that can be complications of the
disease, the number of resulting amputations has not
decreased.
Precautions
Amputations cannot be performed on patients
with uncontrolled diabetes mellitus, heart failure, or
infection. Patients with blood clotting disorders are
also not good candidates for amputation.
Description
Amputations can be either planned or emergency
procedures. Injury and arterial embolisms are the
main reasons for emergency amputations. The operation is performed under regional or general anesthesia
by a general or orthopedic surgeon in a hospital operating room.
Details of the operation vary slightly depending
on what part is to be removed. The goal of all
amputations is twofold: to remove diseased tissue so
that the wound will heal cleanly, and to construct a
stump that will allow the attachment of a prosthesis or
artificial replacement part.
The surgeon makes an incision around the part to
be amputated. The part is removed, and the bone is
smoothed. A flap is constructed of muscle, connective
tissue, and skin to cover the raw end of the bone. The
flap is closed over the bone with sutures (surgical
stitches) that remain in place for about one month.
Often, a rigid dressing or cast is applied that stays in
place for about two weeks.
Preparation
Before an amputation is performed, extensive
testing is done to determine the proper level of
amputation. The goal of the surgeon is to find the
place where healing is most likely to be complete,
while allowing the maximum amount of limb to
remain for effective rehabilitation.
The greater the blood flow through an area, the
more likely healing is to occur. These tests are designed
to measure blood flow through the limb. Several or all
of them can be done to help choose the proper level of
amputation.

measurement of blood pressure in different parts of
the limb

xenon 133 studies, which use a radiopharmaceutical
to measure blood flow

oxygen tension measurements in which an oxygen electrodeis used tomeasure oxygen pressure under the skin.
If the pressure is 0, the healing will not occur. If the
pressure reads higher than 40mm Hg (40 milliliters of
	mercury), healing of the area is likely to be satisfactory.

	laser Doppler measurements of the microcirculation
	of the skin

	skin fluorescent studies that also measure skin
	microcirculation

	skin perfusion measurements using a blood pressure
	cuff and photoelectric detector

	infrared measurements of skin temperature
	No single test is highly predictive of healing, but
	taken together, the results give the surgeon an excellent idea of the best place to amputate.
	Aftercare
	After amputation, medication is prescribed for
	pain, and patients are treated with antibiotics to
	discourage infection. The stump is moved often to
	encourage good circulation. Physical therapy and
	rehabilitation are started as soon as possible, usually
	within 48 hours. Studies have shown that there is a
	positive relationship between early rehabilitation
	and effective functioning of the stump and prosthesis. Length of stay in the hospital depends on the
	severity of the amputation and the general health
	of the amputee, but ranges from several days to
	two weeks.
	Rehabilitation is a long, arduous process, especially for above the knee amputees. Twice daily physical
	therapy is not uncommon. In addition, psychological
	counseling is an important part of rehabilitation.
	Many people feel a sense of loss and grief when they
	lose a body part. Others are bothered by phantom
	limb syndrome, where they feel as if the amputated
	part is still in place. They may even feel pain in the limb
	that does not exist. Many amputees benefit from joining self-help groups and meeting others who are also
	living with amputation. Addressing the emotional
	aspects of amputation often speeds the physical rehabilitation process.
	Risks
	Amputation is major surgery. All the risks associated with the administration of anesthesia exist,
	along with the possibility of heavy blood loss and
	the development of blood clots. Infection is of special concern to amputees. Infection rates in amputations average 15%. If the stump becomes infected, it
	is necessary to remove the prosthesis and sometimes
	to amputate a second time at a higher level.
	Failure of the stump to heal is another major
	complication. Nonhealing is usually due to an inadequate blood supply. The rate of nonhealing varies
	from 5-30% depending on the facility. Centers that
	specialize in amputation usually have the lowest rates
	of complication.
	Persistent pain in the stump or pain in the phantom limb is experienced by most amputees to some
	degree. Treatment of phantom limb pain is difficult.
	Finally, many amputees give up on the rehabilitation
	process and discard their prosthesis. Better fitting
	prosthetics and earlier rehabilitation have decreased
	the incidence of this problem. Researchers and prosthetic manufacturers continue to refine the materials
	and methods used to try to improve the comfort
	and function of prosthetic devices for amputees.
	For example, a 2004 study showed that a technique
	called the bone bridge amputation technique helped
	improve comfort and stability for transtibial
	amputees.
	Normal results
	The five-year survival rate for all lower extremity
	amputees is less than 50%. For diabetic amputees, the
	rate is less than 40%. Up to 50% of people who have
	one leg amputated because of diabetes will lose the
	other within five years. Amputees who walk using a
	prosthesis have a less stable gait. Three to five percent
	of these people fall and break bones because of this
	instability. Although the fractures can be treated,
	about one-half of amputees who suffer them then
	remain wheelchair bound.