Definition
Analgesics are medicines that relieve pain.
Purpose
Analgesics are those drugs that mainly provide
pain relief. The primary classes of analgesics are the
narcotics, including additional agents that are chemically based on the morphine molecule but have minimal abuse potential; nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs) including the salicylates; and acetaminophen. Other drugs, notably the tricyclic antidepressants and anti-epileptic agents such as gabapentin, have
been used to relieve pain, particularly neurologic pain,
but are not routinely classified as analgesics. Analgesics
provide symptomatic relief, but have no effect on the
cause, although clearly the NSAIDs, by virtue of their
dual activity, may be beneficial in both regards.
Description
Pain has been classified as ‘‘productive’’ pain and
‘‘non-productive’’ pain. While this distinction has
no physiologic meaning, it may serve as a guide to
treatment. ‘‘Productive’’ pain has been described as a
warning of injury, and so may be both an indication of
need for treatment and a guide to diagnosis. ‘‘Nonproductive’’ pain by definition serves no purpose
either as a warning or diagnostic tool.
Although pain syndromes may be dissimilar, the
common factor is a sensory pathway from the affected
organ to the brain. Analgesics work at the level of the
nerves, either by blocking the signal from the peripheral nervous system, or by distorting the interpretation
by the central nervous system. Selection of an appropriate analgesic is based on consideration of the riskbenefit factors of each class of drugs, based on type of
pain, severity of pain, and risk of adverse effects.
Traditionally, pain has been divided into two classes,
acute and chronic, although severity and projected
patient survival are other factors that must be considered in drug selection.
Acute pain
Acute pain is self limiting in duration, and
includes post-operative pain, pain of injury, and childbirth. Because pain of these types is expected to be
short term, the long-term side effects of analgesic therapy may routinely be ignored. Thus, these patients
may safely be treated with narcotic analgesics without
concern about possible addiction, or NSAIDs with
only limited concern for the risk of ulcers. Drugs and
doses should be adjusted based on observation of
healing rate, switching patients from high to low
doses, and from narcotic analgesics to non-narcotics
when circumstances permit.
An important consideration of pain management
in severe pain is that patients should not be subject to
the return of pain. Analgesics should be dosed
adequately to ensure that the pain is at least tolerable,
and frequently enough to avoid the anxiety that
accompanies the anticipated return of pain.
Analgesics should never be dosed on an as needed
basis, but should be administered often enough to
assure constant blood levels of analgesic. This applies
to both the narcotic and non-narcotic analgesics.
Chronic pain
Chronic pain, pain lasting over three months and
severe enough to impair function, is more difficult to
treat, since the anticipated side effects of the analgesics
are more difficult to manage. In the case of narcotic
analgesics this means the addiction potential, as well
as respiratory depression and constipation. For the
NSAIDs, the risk of gastric ulcers limit dose. While
some classes of drugs, such as the narcotic agonist/
antagonist drugs bupronophine, nalbuphine and pentazocine, and the selective COX-2 inhibitors celecoxib and
rofecoxib represent advances in reduction of adverse
effects, they are still not fully suitable for long-term
management of severe pain. Generally, chronic pain
management requires a combination of drug therapy,
life-style modification, and other treatment modalities.
Narcotic analgesics
The narcotic analgesics, also termed opioids, are
all derived from opium. The class includes morphine,
codeine, and a number of semi-synthetics including
meperidine (Demerol), propoxyphen (Darvon) and
others. The narcotic analgesics vary in potency, but all
are effective in treatment of visceral pain when used
in adequate doses. Adverse effects are dose related.
Because these drugs are all addictive, they are controlled
under federal and state laws. A variety of dosage forms
are available, including oral solids, liquids, intravenous
and intrathecal injections, and transcutaneous patches.
NSAIDs are effective analgesics even at doses too
low to have any anti-inflammatory effects. There are a
number of chemical classes, but all have similar therapeutic effects and side effects. Most are appropriate
only for oral administration; however ketorolac
(Toradol) is appropriate for injection and may be
used in moderate to severe pain for short periods.
Acetaminophen is a non-narcotic analgesic with no
anti-inflammatory properties. It is appropriate for mild
to moderate pain. Although the drug is well tolerated in
normal doses, it may have significant toxicity at high
doses. Because acetaminophen is largely free of side
effects at therapeutic doses, it has been considered the
first choice for mild pain, including that of osteoarthritis.
Topical analgesics (topical being those that are
applied on the skin) have become much more popular
in recent years. Those applied for local effect include
capsaicin, methylsalicylate, and transdermal lidocaine.
Transdermal fentanyl may be applied for systemic (the
entire body in general) effect. In some cases, these
topical agents reduce the need for drug therapy. Sales
of pain relief patches have increased substantially in
recent years. They are particularly useful for elderly
patients who may not want to take a lot of tablets.
Recommended dosage
Appropriate dosage varies by drug, and should
consider the type of pain, as well as other risks associated with patient age and condition. For example,
narcotic analgesics should usually be avoided in
patients with a history of substance abuse, but may be
fully appropriate in patients with cancer pain. Similarly,
because narcotics are more rapidly metabolized in
patients who have used these drugs for a long period,
higher than normal doses may be needed to provide
adequate pain management. NSAIDs, although comparatively safe in adults, represent an increased risk of
gastrointestinal bleeding in patients over the age of 60.
Precautions
Narcotic analgesics may be contraindicated in
patients with respiratory depression. NSAIDS may
be hazardous to patients with ulcers or an ulcer history. They should be used with care in patients with
renal insufficiency or coagulation disorders. NSAIDs
are contraindicated in patients allergic to aspirin.
Side effects
Each drug’s adverse effects should be reviewed
individually. Drugs within a class may vary in their
frequency and severity of adverse effects.
The primary adverse effects of the narcotic
analgesics are addiction, constipation, and respiratory depression. Because narcotic analgesics stimulate the production of enzymes that cause the
metabolism of these drugs, patients on narcotics for
a prolonged period may require increasing doses.
This is not the same thing as addiction, and is not a
reason for withholding medication from patients in
severe pain.
NSAIDs can lead to ulcers and may cause kidney problems. Gastrointestinal discomfort is common, although in some cases, these drugs may
cause ulcers without the prior warning of gastrointestinal distress. Platelet aggregation problems may
occur, although not to the same extent as is seen
with aspirin.
Interactions
Interactions depend on the specific type of
analgesic.