Definition
General anesthesia is the induction of a state of
unconsciousness with the absence of pain sensation
over the entire body, through the administration of
anesthetic drugs. It is used during certain medical and
surgical procedures.
Purpose
General anesthesia has many purposes including:

pain relief (analgesia)

blocking memory of the procedure (amnesia)

producing unconsciousness

inhibiting normal body reflexes to make surgery safe
and easier to perform

relaxing the muscles of the body
Description
Anesthesia performed with general anesthetics
occurs in four stages which may or may not be observable because they can occur very rapidly:

Stage One: Analgesia. The patient experiences
analgesia or a loss of pain sensation but remains
conscious and can carry on a conversation.

Stage Two: Excitement. The patient may experience
delirium or become violent. Blood pressure rises and
becomes irregular, and breathing rate increases.
This stage is typically bypassed by administering a
barbiturate, such as sodium pentothal, before the
anesthesia.

Stage Three: Surgical Anesthesia. During this stage,
the skeletal muscles relax, and the patient’s breathing
becomes regular. Eye movements slow, then stop,
and surgery can begin.

Stage Four: Medullary Paralysis. This stage occurs if
the respiratory centers in the medulla oblongata of
the brain that control breathing and other vital functions cease to function. Death can result if the patient
cannot be revived quickly. This stage should never be
reached. Careful control of the amounts of anesthetics administered prevent this occurrence.
Agents used for general anesthesia may be either
gases or volatile liquids that are vaporized and inhaled
with oxygen, or drugs delivered intravenously. A combination of inhaled anesthetic gases and intravenous
drugs are usually delivered during general anesthesia;
this practice is called balanced anesthesia and is used
because it takes advantage of the beneficial effects of
each anesthetic agent to reach surgical anesthesia. If
necessary, the extent of the anesthesia produced by
inhaling a general anesthetic can be rapidly modified
by adjusting the concentration of the anesthetic in the
oxygen that is breathed by the patient. The degree of
anesthesia produced by an intravenously injected
anesthesic is fixed and cannot be changed as rapidly.
Most commonly, intravenous anesthetic agents are
used for induction of anesthesia and then followed
by inhaled anesthetic agents.
General anesthesia works by altering the flow of
sodium molecules into nerve cells (neurons) through
the cell membrane. Exactly how the anesthetic does
this is not understood since the drug apparently does
not bind to any receptor on the cell surface and does
not seem to affect the release of chemicals that transmit nerve impulses (neurotransmitters) from the nerve
cells. It is known, however, that when the sodium
molecules do not get into the neurons, nerve impulses
are not generated and the brain becomes unconscious,
does not store memories, does not register pain
impulses from other areas of the body, and does not
control involuntary reflexes. Although anesthesia may
feellike deep sleep,it is not the same. In sleep, some parts
of the brain speed up while others slow down. Under
anesthesia, the loss of consciousnessismore widespread.
When general anesthesia was first introduced in
medical practice, ether and chloroform were inhaled
with the physician manually covering the patient’s
mouth. Since then, general anesthesia has become much
more sophisticated. During most surgical procedures,
anesthetic agents are now delivered and controlled by
computerized equipment that includes anesthetic gas
monitoring as well as patient monitoring equipment.
Anesthesiologists are the physicians that specialize in
the delivery of anesthetic agents. Currently used inhaled
general anesthetics include halothane, enflurane, isoflurane, desfluorane, sevofluorane, and nitrous oxide.

Halothane (Fluothane) is a powerful anesthetic and
can easily be overadministered. This drug causes
unconsciousness but little pain relief so it is often
used with other agents to control pain. Very rarely,
it can be toxic to the liver in adults, causing death. It
also has the potential for causing serious cardiac
dysrhythmias. Halothane has a pleasant odor, and
was frequently the anesthetic of choice for use with
children, but since the introduction of sevofluorane
in the 1990s, halothane use has declined.

Enflurane (Ethrane) is less potent and results in a
more rapid onset of anesthesia and faster awakening
than halothane. In addition, it acts as an enhancer of
paralyzing agents. Enflurane has been found to
increase intracranial pressure and the risk of seizures;
therefore, its use is contraindicated in patients with
seizure disorders.

Isoflurane (Forane) is not toxic to the liver but can
cause some cardiac irregularities. Isofluorane is often
used in combination with intravenous anesthetics for
anesthesia induction. Awakening from anesthesia is
faster than it is with halothane and enfluorane.

Desfluorane (Suprane) may increase the heart rate
and should not be used in patients with aortic valve
stenosis; however, it does not usually cause heart
arrhythmias. Desflurane may cause coughing and excitation during induction and is therefore used with
intravenous anesthetics for induction. Desflurane is
rapidly eliminated and awakening is therefore faster
than with other inhaled agents.

Sevofluorane (Ultane) may also cause increased
heart rate and should not be used in patients with
narrowed aortic valve (stenosis); however, it does
not usually cause heart arrhythmias. Unlike desfluorane, sevofluorane does not cause any coughing
or other related side effects, and can therefore be
used without intravenous agents for rapid induction. For this reason, sevofluorane is replacing
halothane for induction in pediatric patients. Like
desfluorane, this agent is rapidly eliminated and
allows rapid awakening.

Nitrous oxide (laughing gas) is a weak anesthetic and
is used with other agents, such as thiopental, to
produce surgical anesthesia. It has the fastest induction and recovery and is the safest because it does not
slow breathing or blood flow to the brain. However,
it diffuses rapidly into air-containing cavities and can
result in a collapsed lung (pneumothorax) or lower
the oxygen contents of tissues (hypoxia).
Commonly administered intravenous anesthetic
agents include ketamine, thiopental, opioids, and
propofol.

Ketamine (Ketalar) affects the senses, and produces
a dissociative anesthesia (catatonia, amnesia, analgesia) in which the patient may appear awake and
reactive, but cannot respond to sensory stimuli.
These properties make it especially useful for use in
developing countries and during warfare medical
treatment. Ketamine is frequently used in pediatric
patients because anesthesia and analgesia can be
achieved with an intramuscular injection. It is also
used in high-risk geriatric patients and in shock cases,
because it also provides cardiac stimulation.

Thiopental (Pentothal) is a barbiturate that induces
a rapid hypnotic state of short duration. Because
thiopental is slowly metabolized by the liver, toxic
accumulation can occur; therefore, it should not be
continuously infused. Side effects include nausea and
vomiting upon awakening.

Opioids include fentanyl, sufentanil, and alfentanil,
and are frequently used prior to anesthesia and surgery as a sedative and analgesic, as well as a continuous infusion for primary anesthesia. Because opioids
rarely affect the cardiovascular system, they are particularly useful for cardiac surgery and other highrisk cases. Opioids act directly on spinal cord receptors, and are freqently used in epidurals for spinal
anesthesia. Side effects may include nausea and
vomiting, itching, and respiratory depression.
Propofol (Diprivan) is a nonbarbiturate hypnotic
agent and the most recently developed intravenous
anesthetic. Its rapid induction and short duration of
action are identical to thiopental, but recovery
occurs more quickly and with much less nausea and
vomiting. Also, propofol is rapidly metabolized in
the liver and excreted in the urine, so it can be used
for long durations of anesthesia, unlike thiopental.
Hence, propofol is rapidly replacing thiopental as an
intravenous induction agent. It is used for general
surgery, cardiac surgery, neurosurgery, and pediatric
surgery.
General anesthetics are given only by anesthesiologists, the medical professionals trained to use them.
These specialists consider many factors, including a
patient’s age, weight, medication allergies, medical
history, and general health, when deciding which anesthetic or combination of anesthetics to use. General
anesthetics are usually inhaled through a mask or a
breathing tube or injected into a vein, but are also
sometimes given rectally.
General anesthesiaismuch safer today thanitwasin
the past.This progress is due to faster-acting anesthetics,
improved safety standards in the equipment used to
deliver the drugs, and better devices to monitor breathing, heart rate, blood pressure, and brain activity during
surgery. Unpleasant side effects are also less common.
Recommended dosage
The dosage depends on the type of anesthetic, the
patient’s age and physical condition, the type of surgery
or medical procedure being done, and other medication
the patient takes before, during, or after surgery.
Precautions
Although the risks of serious complications from
general anesthesia are very low, they can include heart
attack, stroke, brain damage, and death. Anyone
scheduled to undergo general anesthesia should thoroughly discuss the benefits and risks with a physician.
The risks of complications depend, in part, on a
patient’s age, sex, weight, allergies, general health,
and history of smoking, drinking alcohol, or drug
use. Some of these risks can be minimized by ensuring
that the physician and anesthesiologist are fully
informed of the detailed health condition of the
patient, including any drugs that he or she may be
using. Older people are especially sensitive to the
effects of certain anesthetics and may be more likely
to experience side effects from these drugs.
Patients who have had general anesthesia should
not drink alcoholic beverages or take medication that
slow down the central nervous system (such as antihistamines, sedatives, tranquilizers, sleep aids, certain pain
relievers, muscle relaxants, and anti-seizure medication) for at least 24 hours, except under a doctor’s care.
Special conditions
People with certain medical conditions are at greater
risk of developing problems with anesthetics. Before
undergoing general anesthesia, anyone with the following conditions should absolutely inform their doctor. ALLERGIES. Anyone who has had allergic or other
unusual reactions to barbiturates or general anesthetics
in the past should notify the doctor before having general anesthesia. In particular, people who have had
malignant hyperthermia or whose family members
have had malignant hyperthermia during or after
being given an anesthetic should inform the physician.
Signs of malignant hyperthermia include rapid, irregular heartbeat, breathing problems, very high fever, and
muscle tightness or spasms. These symptoms can occur
following the administration of general anesthesia
using inhaled agents, especially halothane. In addition,
the doctor should also be told about any allergies to
foods, dyes, preservatives, or other substances. PREGNANCY. The effects of anesthetics on pregnant women and fetuses vary, depending on the type
of drug. In general, giving large amounts of general
anesthetics to the mother during labor and delivery
may make the baby sluggish after delivery. Pregnant
women should discuss the use of anesthetics during
labor and delivery with their doctors. Pregnant women
who may be given general anesthesia for other medical
procedures should ensure that the treating physician is
informed about the pregnancy. BREASTFEEDING. Some general anesthetics pass
into breast milk, but they have not been reported to
cause problems in nursing babies whose mothers were
given the drugs.
OTHER MEDICAL CONDITIONS. Before being given
a general anesthetic, a patient who has any of the
following conditions should inform his or her doctor:

neurological conditions, such as epilepsy or stroke

problems with the stomach or esophagus, such as
ulcers or heartburn

eating disorders

loose teeth, dentures, bridgework

heart disease or family history of heart problems

lung diseases, such as emphysema or asthma

history of smoking

immune system diseases
arthritis or any other conditions that affect
movement

diseases of the endocrine system, such as diabetes or
thyroid problems
Side effects
Because general anesthetics affect the central nervous system, patients may feel drowsy, weak, or tired
for as long as a few days after having general anesthesia. Fuzzy thinking, blurred vision, and coordination
problems are also possible. For these reasons, anyone
who has had general anesthesia should not drive,
operate machinery, or perform other activities that
could endanger themselves or others for at least 24
hours, or longer if necessary.
Most side effects usually disappear as the anesthetic wears off. A nurse or doctor should be notified if
these or other side effects persist or cause problems,
such as:

Headache

vision problems, including blurred or double vision

shivering or trembling

muscle pain

dizziness, lightheadedness, or faintness

drowsiness

mood or mental changes

nausea or vomiting

sore throat

nightmares or unusual dreams
A doctor should be notified as soon as possible if
any of the following side effects occur within two
weeks of having general anesthesia:

severe headache

pain in the stomach or abdomen

back or leg pain

severe nausea

black or bloody vomit

unusual tiredness or weakness

weakness in the wrist and fingers

weight loss or loss of appetite

increase or decrease in amount of urine

pale skin

yellow eyes or skin
Interactions
General anesthetics may interact with other medicines. When this happens, the effects of one or both of
the drugs may be altered or the risk of side effects may
be greater. Anyone scheduled to undergo general
anesthesia should inform the doctor about all other
medication that he or she is taking. This includes prescription drugs, nonprescription medicines, and street
drugs. Serious and possibly life-threatening reactions
may occur when general anesthetics are given to people who use street drugs, such as cocaine, marijuana,
phencyclidine (PCP or angel dust), amphetamines
(uppers), barbiturates (downers), heroin, or other narcotics. Anyone who uses these drugs should make sure
their doctor or dentist knows what they have taken.