Definition
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (also
called ACE inhibitors) are medicines that block the
conversion of the chemical angiotensin I to a substance
that increases salt and water retention in the body.
Purpose
ACE inhibitors are used in the treatment of high
blood pressure. They may be used alone or in combination with other medicines for high blood pressure.
They work by preventing a chemical in the blood,
angiotensin I, from being converted into a substance
that increases salt and water retention in the body.
Increased salt and water retention lead to high blood
pressure. ACE inhibitors also make blood vessels
relax, which helps lower blood pressure and allows
more oxygen-rich blood to reach the heart.
Treating high blood pressure is important because
the condition puts a burden on the heart and the
arteries, which can lead to permanent damage over
time. If untreated, high blood pressure increases the
risk of heart attacks, heart failure, stroke, or kidney
failure.
ACE inhibitors may also be prescribed for other
conditions. For example, captopril (Capoten) is used
to treat kidney problems in people who take insulin to
control diabetes. Captopril and lisinopril are also
given to some patients after a heart attack. Heart
attacks damage and weaken the heart muscle, and
the damage continues even after a person recovers
from the attack. This medicine helps slow down
further damage to the heart. ACE inhibitors also
may be used to treat congestive heart failure.
Description
ACE inhibitors are available only with a physician’s prescription and come in tablet, capsule, and
injectable forms. Some commonly used ACE inhibitors are benazepril (Lotensin), captopril (Capoten),
enalapril (Vasotec), fosinopril (Monopril), lisinopril
(Prinivil, Zestril), moexipril (Univasc), perindopril
(Aceon), quinapril (Accupril), ramipril (Altace) and
trandolapril (Mavik).
Recommended dosage
The recommended dosage depends on the type of
ACE inhibitor and the medical condition for which
it is being taken. Check with the physician who
prescribed the drug or the pharmacist who filled the
prescription for the correct dosage.
This medicine may take weeks to noticeably lower
blood pressure. Take it exactly as directed.
Do not stop taking this medicine without checking with the physician who prescribed it.
Precautions
A person taking an ACE inhibitor should see a
physician regularly. The physician will check the
blood pressure to make sure the medicine is working
as it should and will note any unwanted side effects.
People who have high blood pressure often feel perfectly fine. However, they should continue to see their
physicians even when they feel well so that the physician can keep a close watch on their condition. It is
also important for patients to keep taking their medicine even when they feel fine.
ACE inhibitors will not cure high blood pressure,
but will help control the condition. To avoid the serious health problems that high blood pressure can
cause, patients may have to take medicine for the rest
of their lives. Furthermore, medicine alone may not be
enough. Patients with high blood pressure may also
need to avoid certain foods, such as salty snacks, and
keep their weight under control. The health care professional who is treating the condition can offer advice
on what measures may be necessary. Patients being
treated for high blood pressure should not change
their diets without consulting their physicians.
Anyone taking this medicine for high blood pressure should not take any other prescription or overthe-counter (OTC) medicine without first checking
with his or her physician. Some medicines, such as
certain cold remedies, may increase blood pressure.
Some people feel dizzy or lightheaded after taking
the first dose of an ACE inhibitor, especially if they
have been taking a water pill (diuretic). Anyone who
takes these drugs should not drive, use machines or do
anything else that might be dangerous until they have
found out how the drugs affect them. Such symptoms
should be reported to the physician or pharmacist if
they do not subside within a day or so. For the first one
or two days of taking an ACE inhibitor, patients may
become lightheaded when arising from bed in the
morning. Patienst should rise slowly to a sitting position before standing up.
While a goal of treatment with an ACE inhibitor
is to lower the blood pressure, patients must be careful
not to let their blood pressure get too low. Low blood
pressure can lead to dizziness, lightheadedness and
fainting. To prevent the blood pressure from getting
too low, observe these precautions:

Do not drink alcohol without checking with the
physician who prescribed this medicine.

Captopril and moexipril should be taken one hour
before meals. Other ACE inhinbitors may be taken
with or without meals.

Avoid overheating when exercising or in hot
weather. The loss of water from the body through
heavy sweating can cause low blood pressure.

Check with a physician right away if illness occurs
while taking an ACE inhibitor. This is especially true
if the illness involves severe nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea. Vomiting and diarrhea can cause the loss of too
much water from the body, which can lead to low
blood pressure.
Anyone who is taking ACE inhibitors should be
sure to tell the health care professional in charge
before having any surgical or dental procedures or
receiving emergency treatment.
Some ACE inhibitors may change the results of
certain medical tests, such as blood or urine tests.
Before having medical tests, anyone taking this medicine should alert the health care professional in charge.
Do not use a potassium supplement or a salt substitute that contains potassium without first checking
with the physician who prescribed the ACE inhibitor.
Patients who are being treated with bee or wasp
venom to prevent allergic reactions to stings may have
a severe allergic reaction to certain ACE inhibitors.
Special conditions
People with certain medical conditions or who are
taking certain other medicines can have problems if
they take ACE inhibitors. Before taking these drugs,
be sure to let the physician know about any of these
conditions.ALLERGIES. Anyone who has had unusual reactions to an ACE inhibitor in the past should let his
or her physician know before taking this type of medicine again. The physician should also be told about
any allergies to foods, dyes, preservatives, or other
substances.PREGNANCY. The use of ACE inhibitors in pregnancy can cause serious problems and even death in the
fetus or newborn. Women who are pregnant or who
may become pregnant should check with their physicians before using this medicine. Women who become
pregnant while taking this medicine should check with
their physicians immediately.BREASTFEEDING. Some ACE inhibitors pass into
breast milk. Women who are breastfeeding should
check with their physicians before using ACE
inhibitors.
OTHER MEDICAL CONDITIONS. Before using ACE
inhibitors, people with any of these medical problems
should make sure their physicians are aware of their
conditions:

diabetes

heart or blood vessel disease

recent heart attack or stroke

liver disease

kidney disease

kidney transplant

scleroderma

systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
USE OF CERTAIN MEDICINES. Taking ACE inhibitors with certain other drugs may affect the way the
drugs work or may increase the chance of side
effects.
Side effects
The most common side effect is a dry, continuing
cough. This usually does not subside unless the medication is stopped. Ask the physician if the cough can
be treated. Less common side effects, such as headache, loss of taste, unusual tiredness, and nausea or
diarrhea also may occur and do not need medical
attention unless they are severe or they interfere with
normal activities.
More serious side effects are rare, but may occur.
If any of the following side effects occur, check with a
physician immediately:

swelling of the face, lips, tongue, throat, arms, legs,
hands, or feet
itchy skin

sudden breathing or swallowing problems

chest pain

hoarseness

sore throat

fever and chills

stomach pain

yellow eyes or skin
In addition, anyone who has any of the following symptoms while taking an ACE inhibitor
should check with his or her physician as soon as
possible:

dizziness, lightheadedness, fainting

confusion

nervousness

fever

joint pain

numbness or tingling in hands, feet, or lips

weak or heavy feeling in the legs

skin rash

irregular heartbeat

shortness of breath or other breathing problems
Other side effects may occur. Anyone who has
unusual symptoms after taking an ACE inhibitor
should get in touch with his or her physician.
Interactions
ACE inhibitors may interact with certain foods
and other medicines. For example, captopril
(Capoten) interacts with food and should be taken
one hour before meals. Anyone who takes ACE inhibitors should let the physician know all other medicines he or she is taking and should ask about foods
that should be avoided. Among the foods and drugs
that may interact with ACE inhibitors are:

water pills (diuretics)

lithium, used to treat bipolar disorder

tetracycline, an antibiotic

medicines or supplements that contain potassium

salt substitutes that contain potassium
The list above may not include everything that
interacts with ACE inhibitors. Be sure to check with
a physician or pharmacist before combining ACE
inhibitors with any other prescription or nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicine.