Definition
The most common problem following an animal
bite is simple infection. The saliva of dogs, cats, ferrets,
and rabbits is known to contain a wide variety of
bacteria. According to one recent study, bacteria or
other pathogens show up in about 85 percent of bites.
When an animal bites, it can then transmit pathogens
into the wound. These microorganisms may grow
within the wound and cause an infection. The consequences of infection range from mild discomfort to
life-threatening complications.
Description
Two to 4.5 million animal bites occur each year in
the United States; about 1% of these bites require
hospitalization. Animal bites result in 334,000 emergency room visits per year, which represents approximately 1% of all emergency hospital visits, at an
annual cost of $100 million dollars in health care
expenses and lost income. Children are the most frequent victims of dog bites, with 5–9 year-old boys
having the highest incidence. Men are more often
bitten by dogs than are women (3:1), whereas women
are more often bitten by cats (3:1).
Dog bites make up 80–85% of all reported incidents. Cats account for about 10% of reported bites,
and other animals (including hamsters, ferrets, rabbits, horses, raccoons, bats, skunks, and monkeys)
make up the remaining 5–10%. Cat bites become
infected more frequently than dog bites. A dog’s
mouth is rich in bacteria, but only 15–20% of dog
bites become infected. In contrast, approximately
30–50% of cat bites become infected.
Many factors contribute to the infection rates,
including the type of wound inflicted, the location of
the wound, pre-existing health conditions in the bitten
person, the extent of delay before treatment, patient
compliance and the presence of a foreign body in the
wound. Dogs usually inflict crush injuries because
they have rounded teeth and strong jaws; thus, the
bite of an adult dog can exert up to 200 pounds per
square inch of pressure. This pressure usually results in
a crushing injury, causing damage to such deep structures as bones, blood vessels, tendons, muscles, and
nerves. The canine teeth in a dog’s mouth are also
sharp and strong, often inflicting lacerations. Cats,
with their needle-like incisors and carnassial teeth,
typically cause puncture wounds. Puncture wounds
appear innocuous on the surface, but the underlying
injury goes deep. Cat teeth essentially inject bacteria
into the bite, and the deep, narrow wound is difficult
to clean. Persons with impaired immunocompetence—for example, individuals with HIV infection—are especially vulnerable to infection from cat
bites. Lastly, bites or stings from marine creatures
(sharks, rays, eels, etc.) require immediate medical
attention as these bites may contain disease organisms
unique to the ocean environment as well as causing
severe loss of blood.
The bacterial species most commonly found
in bite wounds include Pasteurella multocida,
Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas sp, and
Streptococcus sp. P. multocida, the root cause of pasteurellosis, is especially prominent in cat bite infections. Other infectious diseases from animal bites
include cat-scratch disease, tetanus and rabies.
Doctors are increasingly aware of the importance
of checking animal bite wounds for anaerobic organisms, which are microbes that can live and multiply in
the absence of air or oxygen. A study published in 2003
reported that about two-thirds of animal bite wounds
contain anaerobes. These organisms can produce such
complications as septic arthritis, tenosynovitis, meningitis, and infections of the lymphatic system.
With regard to the most common types of domestic pets, it is useful to note that biting and other
aggressive behavior has different causes in dogs and
cats. To some extent these differences are rooted in
divergent evolutionary pathways, but they have also
been influenced by human interference through selective breeding. Dogs were first domesticated by humans
as early as 10,000 B.C. for hunting and as guard or
attack dogs. Many species travel in packs or groups
in the wild, and many human fatalities resulting from
dog bites involve a large group of dogs attacking one
or two persons. In addition, dogs typically relate to
humans according to a hierarchical model of dominance and submission, and many of the techniques of
dog training are intended to teach the dog to respect
human authority. Certain breeds of dogs are much
more likely to attack humans than others; those most
often involved in fatal attacks are pit bulls, Rottweilers,
German shepherds, huskies, and mastiffs. According to
the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), there are
between 15 and 20 fatal dog attacks on humans in the
United States each year. There are several assessment
or evaluation scales that veterinarians or animal trainers can use to score individual or mixed-breed dogs
for dominant or aggressive behavior.
Unlike dogs, cats were not domesticated until
about 3000 B.C., and were important to ancient civilizations as rodent catchers and household companions
rather than as protectors or hunters of wild game.
Biologists classify cats as solitary predators rather
than as pack or herd animals; as a result, cats do not
relate to humans as authority figures in the same way
that dogs do, and they do not form groups that attack
humans when threatened or provoked. In addition,
domestic cats have been selectively bred for appearance rather than for fierceness or aggression. Most cat
bites are the result of fear on the cat’s part (as when
being placed in a carrier for a trip to the vet) or a
phenomenon known as petting-induced aggression.
Petting-induced aggression is a behavior in which a
cat that has been apparently enjoying contact with a
human suddenly turns on the human and bites. This
behavior appears to be more common in cats that had
no contact with humans during their first seven weeks
of life. In other cats, this type of aggression appears to
be related to a hypersensitive nervous system; petting
or cuddling that was pleasurable to the cat for a few
seconds or minutes becomes irritating, and the cat
bites as a way of indicating that it has had enough.
In older cats, petting-induced aggression is often a sign
that the cat feels pain from touching or pressure on
arthritic joints in its neck or back.
Causes and symptoms
The most common sign of infection from an animal bite is inflammation. The skin around the wound
is red and feels warm, and the wound may exude pus.
Nearby lymph glands may be swollen. Complications
can arise if the infection is not treated and spreads into
deeper structures or into the bloodstream. If the bite is
deep or occurs on the hand or at a joint, complications
are more likely.
Live disease-causing bacteria within the bloodstream and tissues cause complications far from the
wound site. Such complications include meningitis,
brain abscesses, pneumonia and lung abscesses, and
heart infections, among others. These complications
can be fatal. Deep bites or bites near joints can damage
joints and bones, causing inflammation of the bone
and bone marrow or septic arthritis.
Cat-scratch disease is caused by Bartonella
henselae, a bacterium that is carried in cat saliva;
infection may be transmitted by a bite or scratch.
Approximately 22,000 cases are reported each year in
the United States; worldwide, nine out of every
100,000 individuals become infected. More than 80%
of reported cases occur in persons under the age of 21.
The disease is not normally severe in individuals with
healthy immune systems. Symptoms may become serious, however, in immunocompromised individuals,
such as those with acquired immune deficiency
syndrome (AIDS) or those undergoing chemotherapy.
Common symptoms include an inflamed sore in the
area of the bite or scratch, swollen lymph nodes, fever,
fatigue, and rash.
Rabies is caused by a virus that is transmitted
through the bite of an animal that is already
infected. It is classified as a zoonosis, which is a
term that refers to any disease of animals that can
be transmitted to humans. More than 90% of animal
rabies cases occur in such wild animals as skunks,
bats, and raccoons, with such domestic animals as
dogs and cats accounting for fewer than 10% of
cases. The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that between 35,000 and 50,000 individuals
worldwide die each year as a result of rabies. The
highest incidence of rabies occurs in Asia where, in
1997, over 33,000 deaths were noted, most occurring
in India. Rabies is nowadays rare in the United
States, as a result of good animal control practices.
Onset is delayed, usually weeks to months after the
person has been bitten. Early symptoms of rabies
include fever, headache, and flu-like symptoms.
These progress to anxiety, hallucinations, muscle
spasms, partial paralysis, fear of water (hydrophobia), and other neurological symptoms as the virus
spreads to the central nervous system. Medical treatment must be sought soon after exposure because
death invariably follows once the infection becomes
established.Most deaths from rabies in the United States
result from bat bites; the most recent victim was a
66-year-old man in California who died in September
2003 after failing to report a bat bite.
Diagnosis
A medical examination involves taking the history
of the injury and assessing the wound type and
damage. Tetanus immunization and general health
status are checked. An x ray may be ordered to assess
bone damage and to check for foreign objects in the
wound. Wound cultures are done for infected bites if
the victim is at high risk for complications or if the
infection does not respond to treatment. Evaluation of
possible exposure to rabies is also important. A biting
animal suspected of having rabies is usually apprehended, tested, and observed for a period of time for
evidence of pre-existing infection.
Treatment
Treatment depends on the wound type, its site,
and risk factors for infection. All wounds are
cleaned and disinfected as thoroughly as possible.
Bites to the head and face usually receive sutures, as
do severe lacerations elsewhere. Puncture wounds
are left open. If abscess formation occurs, the physician may perform an incision so as to drain the
abscess.
If infection occurs, antibiotics are prescribed.
Antibiotics may also be used for infection prevention. Since a single bite wound may contain many
different types of bacteria, no single antibiotic is
always effective. Commonly prescribed antibiotics
are penicillin or a combination of amoxicillin and
clavulanate potassium. Aztreonam has been
reported to be effective in treating infections caused
by P. multocida.
Because rabies is caused by a virus, antibiotics
are not effective. In addition, as of 2003, there is no
known cure for the disease once symptoms become
apparent. It is therefore recommended that individuals with a high risk of contracting the disease
(veterinarians, animal handlers, some laboratory
workers) receive preexposure vaccination. Individuals
bitten by an unknown or potentially rapid animal
should receive postexposure vaccination, also called
postexposure prophylaxis (PEP). The PEP regimen
consists of one dose of vaccine given at the initial visit
as well as one dose of human immune globulin.
Additional doses of vaccine are given on days 3, 7, 14,
and 28.
Prognosis
Once a bacterial infection is halted, the bite victim
usually recovers fully. There is no known cure for
rabies once symptoms become evident and death is
almost certain. WHO reports that 114 rabies deaths
occurred in the Americas in 1997, with only four
deaths occurring that year in the United States, thus
emphasizing the importance of good animal control
practice and postexposure prophylaxis.
Prevention
Preventing bites obviously prevents subsequent
infections. With regard to domestic pets, parents
should inform themselves about the aggression level
and other characteristics of a particular breed before
bringing a purebred pet dog into the family, and
consider having a specific dog evaluated by a veterinarian or animal behaviorist before adopting it. In
addition, parents should make sure that the dog has
been neutered or spayed, since intact dogs of either
sex are more likely to bite than those that have been
altered. Cat bites can often be prevented by learning
about a cat’s body language and recognizing the signs
of petting-induced aggression. These include dilating
pupils, a low growl, stiffening of the body, twitching
of the tail, and flattening the ears backward against
the head.
Children under 12 years of age are at a higher risk
for bites due to their small size and their inexperience
with animals; therefore, they should be supervised
with animals and taught to act appropriately around
them. In particular, children should be taught not to
tease a dog by pulling its fur or tail; to leave a dog
alone while it is eating; and to avoid running or
screaming in the presence of a dog, as the animal is
more likely to chase a moving object. Direct eye contact with a threatening dog should be avoided, as the
dog may interpret that as aggression. It is best to
stand still if at all possible, with feet together and
arms against the chest; most dogs will lose interest
in an object that is not moving, and will eventually go
away.
A wild animal that is unusually aggressive or
behaving strangely (e.g. a raccoon or bat that is active
during the daytime or is physically uncoordinated)
should be avoided and reported to the local animal
control authorities; it may be infected with the rabies
virus. Wild animals should not be taken in as pets, and
garbage or pet food that might attract wild animals
should not be left outside the home or camp site.
People should also avoid trying to break up fights
between animals and should as a rule approach
unknown cats and dogs very cautiously, especially on
their territory. Finally, animals should not be trained
to fight.
Domestic pets should be vaccinated against
rabies; people should consult a veterinarian for
advice about the frequency of booster vaccinations
for the area in which they live. In addition, people
who are traveling to countries where rabies is endemic should consider vaccination before leaving the
United States.