Definition
Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) refers to inflammation of the joints in the spine. AS is also known as
rheumatoid spondylitis or Marie-Stru¨mpell disease
(among other names).
Description
A form of arthritis, AS is characterized by chronic
inflammation, causing pain and stiffness of the back,
progressing to the chest and neck. Eventually, the
whole back may become curved and inflexible if the
bones fuse (this is known as ‘‘bamboo spine’’). AS is a
systemic disorder that may involve multiple organs,
such as the:

eye (causing an inflammation of the iris, or iritis)

heart (causing aortic valve disease)

lungs

skin (causing a scaly skin condition, or psoriasis)

gastrointestinal tract (causing inflammation within
the small intestine, called ileitis, or inflammation of
the large intestine, called colitis)
Less than 1% of the population has AS; however,
20% of AS sufferers have a relative with the disorder.
Causes and symptoms
Genetics play an important role in the disease, but
the cause of AS is still unknown. More than 90% of
patients have a gene called HLA-B27, but only
10-15% of those who inherit the gene develop the
disease. Symptoms of AS include:

low back and hip pain and stiffness

difficulty expanding the chest

pain in the neck, shoulders, knees, and ankles

low-grade fever

fatigue

weight loss
AS is seen most commonly in males 30 years old
and older. Initial symptoms are uncommon after
the age of 30, although the diagnosis may not be
established until after that age. The incidence of AS
in Afro-Americans is about 25% of the incidence in
Caucasians.
Diagnosis
Doctors usually diagnose the disease simply by
the patient’s report of pain and stiffness. Doctors
also review spinal and pelvic x rays since involvement
of the hip and pelvic joints is common and may be the
first abnormality seen on the x ray. The doctor may
also order a blood test to determine the presence of
HLA-B27 antigen. When a diagnosis is made, patients
may be referred to a rheumatologist, a doctor who
specializes in treating arthritis. Patients may also be
referred to an orthopedic surgeon, a doctor who can
surgically correct joint or bone disorders.
Treatment
Physical therapists prescribe exercises to prevent a
stooped posture and breathing problems when
the spine starts to fuse and ribs are affected. Back
braces may be used to prevent continued deformity
of the spine and ribs. Only in severe cases of deformity
is surgery performed to straighten and realign the
spine, or to replace knee, shoulder, or hip joints.
Alternative treatment
To reduce inflammation various herbal remedies,
including white willow (Salix alba), yarrow (Achillea
millefolium), and lobelia (Lobelia inflata), may be
helpful. Acupuncture, performed by a trained professional, has helped some patients manage their pain.
Homeopathic practitioners may prescribe such
remedies as Bryonia and Rhus toxicodendron for
pain relief.
Prognosis
There is no cure for AS, and the course of the
disease is unpredictable. Generally, AS progresses for
about 10 years and then its progression levels off.
Most patients can lead normal lives with treatment
to control symptoms.
Prevention
There is no known way to prevent AS.