Definition
Anorectal disorders are a group of medical disorders that occur at the junction of the anal canal and the
rectum.
Description
The anal canal, also called the anus, is the opening
at the bottom end of the digestive tract and is a combination of external skin and tissue from the digestive
tract. It has many sensory nerves and is sensitive to
pain. The rectum is the last section of the digestive
tract and has a mucus layer as its inside surface. It
has very few sensory nerves and is, therefore, relatively
insensitive to pain. The anal canal has a ring of muscle,
called the anal sphincter, which keeps the anus closed.
There are a number of different anorectal disorders.
Causes and symptoms
An anal fissure is a tear in the lining of the anus
that is usually caused by a hard bowel movement.
Fissures are painful and bleed when the tissue is
stressed during bowel movements.
Anorectal abscesses are characterized by pusforming infections in the anorectal region. Painful
abscesses form under the skin.
An anorectal fistula is an abnormal opening or
channel from the anorectal area to another part of
the body. Typically, the channel leads to pockets of
skin near the anus. When seen in infants, anorectal
fistulas are considered birth defects. These are seen
more frequently in boys than in girls. Fistulas are
also seen more frequently in people who have other
diseases, including Crohn’s disease, tuberculosis,
cancer, and diverticulitis. Anorectal fistulas also
occur following anorectal abscesses or other injury
to the anal area. Fistulas are usually painful and
discharge pus.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is made by visual inspection of the skin
around the anus. Also, the doctor may probe the
rectum with a gloved finger. An anoscope is a short
instrument that allows the physician to view the inside
of the anus. A proctoscope is a longer, rigid viewing
tube of approximately six to ten inches in length,
which may be used to look for anorectal disorders.
A sigmoidoscope is a longer, flexible tube, that
allows the physician to view up to about two feet of
the inside of the large intestine. Tissue samples and
material for microbial culture may be obtained during
the examination.
Treatment
Treatment usually isn’t required for hemorrhoids.
Most hemorrhoids will heal if the patient takes stool
softeners to relieve the constipation. Enlarged blood
vessels can be eliminated by surgeryif they are considered
a severe problem. In the case of fissures, treatment
involves stool softeners that eliminate stress on the
fissure during bowelmovements, which allows the fissure
to heal. If the fissure doesn’t heal, surgery is required.
Treatment for anorectal abscesses consists of cutting the
abscess and draining the pus. Fistulas are treated by
surgery.The usual treatment for proctitis is antibiotics.