Definition
Anorexia nervosa is an eating disorder characterized by unrealistic fear of weight gain, self-starvation,
and conspicuous distortion of body image. The name
comes from two Latin words that mean nervous
inability to eat. In females who have begun to
menstruate, anorexia nervosa is usually marked by
amenorrhea, or skipping at least three menstrual periods in a row. The fourth edition of the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, or DSM-IV
(1994), defines two subtypes of anorexia nervosa–a
restricting type, characterized by strict dieting and
exercise without binge eating; and a binge-eating/purging type, marked by episodes of compulsive eating
with or without self-induced vomiting and the use of
laxatives or enemas. DSM-IV defines a binge as a
time-limited (usually under two hours) episode of
compulsive eating in which the individual consumes
a significantly larger amount of food than most people
would eat in similar circumstances.
Description
Anorexia nervosa was not officially classified as a
psychiatric disorder until the third edition of DSM in 1980. It is, however, a growing problem among adolescent females. Its incidence in the United States has
doubled since 1970. The rise in the number of reported
cases reflects a genuine increase in the number of
persons affected by the disorder, and not simply earlier
or more accurate diagnosis. Estimates of the incidence
of anorexia range between 0.5–1% of caucasian female
adolescents. Over 90% of patients diagnosed with the
disorder as of 1998 are female. It was originally thought
that only 5% of anorexics are male, but that estimate is
being revised upward. The peak age range for onset of
the disorder is 14-18 years, although there are patients
who develop anorexia as late as their 40s. In the 1970s
and 1980s, anorexia was regarded as a disorder of
upper- and middle-class women, but that generalization
is also changing. More recent studies indicate that
anorexia is increasingly common among women of all
races and social classes in the United States.
Anorexia nervosa is a serious public health
problem not only because of its rising incidence, but
also because it has one of the highest mortality rates
of any psychiatric disorder. Moreover, the disorder
may cause serious long-term health complications,
including congestive heart failure, sudden death,
growth retardation, dental problems, constipation,
stomach rupture, swelling of the salivary glands, anemia and other abnormalities of the blood, loss of
kidney function, and osteoporosis.
Causes and symptoms
Anorexia is a disorder that results from the interaction of cultural and interpersonal as well as biological factors. While the precise cause of the disease is not
known, it has been linked to the following:
Social influences
The rising incidence of anorexia is thought to
reflect the present idealization of thinness as a badge
of upper-class status as well as of female beauty. In
addition, the increase in cases of anorexia includes
‘‘copycat’’ behavior, with some patients developing
the disorder from imitating other girls.
The onset of anorexia in adolescence is attributed
to a developmental crisis caused by girls’ changing
bodies coupled with society’s overemphasis on
women’s looks. The increasing influence of the mass
media in spreading and reinforcing gender stereotypes
has also been noted.
Occupational goals
The risk of developing anorexia is higher among
adolescents preparing for careers that require attention to weight and/or appearance. These high-risk
groups include dancers, fashion models, professional
athletes (including gymnasts, skaters, long-distance
runners, and jockeys), and actresses.
Genetic and biological influences
Women whose biological mothers or sisters have
the disorder appear to be at increased risk.
Psychological factors
A number of theories have been advanced to
explain the psychological aspects of the disorder. No
single explanation covers all cases. Anorexia nervosa
has been interpreted as:

A rejection of female sexual maturity. This rejection
is variously interpreted as a desire to remain a child,
or as a desire to resemble men as closely as possible.

A reaction to sexual abuse or assault.

A desire to appear as fragile and nonthreatening as
possible. This hypothesis reflects the idea that female
passivity and weakness are attractive to men.

Overemphasis on control, autonomy, and independence. Some anorexics come from achievementoriented families that stress physical fitness and
dieting. Many anorexics are perfectionistic and
‘‘driven’’ about schoolwork and other matters in
addition to weight control.

Evidence of family dysfunction. In some families, a
daughter’s eating disorder serves as a distraction
from marital discord or other family tensions.

Inability to interpret the body’s hunger signals accurately due to early experiences of inappropriate
feeding.
Male anorexics
Although anorexia nervosa is still considered a
disorder that largely affects women, its incidence in
the male population is rising. Less is known about the
causes of anorexia in males, but some risk factors are
the same as for females. These include certain occupational goals and increasing media emphasis on external appearance in men. Moreover, homosexual males
are under pressure to conform to an ideal body weight
that is about 20 pounds lighter than the standard
‘‘attractive’’ weight for heterosexual males.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of anorexia nervosa is complicated by a
number of factors. One is that the disorder varies
somewhat in severity from patient to patient. A second
factor is denial, which is regarded as an early sign of
the disorder. Most anorexics deny that they are ill and
are usually brought to treatment by a family member.
Most anorexics are diagnosed by pediatricians or
family practitioners. Anorexics develop emaciated
bodies, dry or yellowish skin, and abnormally low
blood pressure. There is usually a history of amenorrhea (failure to menstruate) in females, and sometimes
of abdominal pain, constipation, or lack of energy.
The patient may feel chilly or have developed lanugo,
a growth of downy body hair. If the patient has been
vomiting, she may have eroded tooth enamel or
Russell’s sign (scars on the back of the hand). The
second step in diagnosis is measurement of the
patient’s weight loss. DSM-IV specifies a weight loss
leading to a body weight 15% below normal, with
some allowance for body build and weight history.
The doctor will need to rule out other physical
conditions that can cause weight loss or vomiting
after eating, including metabolic disorders, brain
tumors (especially hypothalamus and pituitary gland
lesions), diseases of the digestive tract, and a condition
called superior mesenteric artery syndrome. Persons
with this condition sometimes vomit after meals
because the blood supply to the intestine is blocked.
The doctor will usually order blood tests, an electrocardiogram, urinalysis, and bone densitometry (bone
density test) in order to exclude other diseases and to
assess the patient’s nutritional status.
The doctor will also need to distinguish between
anorexia and other psychiatric disorders, including
depression, schizophrenia, social phobia, obsessivecompulsive disorder, and body dysmorphic disorder.
Two diagnostic tests that are often used are the
Eating Attitudes Test (EAT) and the Eating Disorder
Inventory (EDI).
Treatment
Treatment of anorexia nervosa includes both
short- and long-term measures, and requires assessment
by dietitians and psychiatrists as well as medical specialists. Therapy is often complicated by the patient’s
resistance or failure to carry out treatment plan.
Hospital treatment
Hospitalization is recommended for anorexics
with any of the following characteristics:

weight of 40% or more below normal; or weight loss
over a three-month period of more than 30 pounds

severely disturbed metabolism

severe binging and purging

signs of psychosis

severe depression or risk of suicide

family in crisis
Hospital treatment includes individual and group
therapy as well as refeeding and monitoring of the
patient’s physical condition. Treatment usually
requires two to four months in the hospital. In extreme
cases, hospitalized patients may be force-fed through a
tube inserted in the nose (nasogastric tube) or by overfeeding (hyperalimentation techniques).
Outpatient treatment
Anorexics who are not severely malnourished can
be treated by outpatient psychotherapy. The types of
treatment recommended are supportive rather than
insight-oriented, and include behavioral approaches
as well as individual or group therapy. Family therapy
is often recommended when the patient’s eating disorder is closely tied to family dysfunction. Self-help
groups are often useful in helping anorexics find social
support and encouragement. Psychotherapy with
anorexics is a slow and difficult process; about 50%
of patients continue to have serious psychiatric problems after their weight has stabilized.
Medications
Anorexics have been treated with a variety of
medications, including antidepressants, antianxiety
drugs, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, and
lithium carbonate. The effectiveness of medications
in treatment regimens is still debated. However, at
least one study of Prozac showed it helped the patient
maintain weight gained while in the hospital.
Prognosis
Figures for long-term recovery vary from study to
study, but the most reliable estimates are that 40-60%
of anorexics will make a good physical and social
recovery, and 75% will gain weight. The long-term
mortality rate for anorexia is estimated at around
10%, although some studies give a lower figure of
3-4%. The most frequent causes of death associated
with anorexia are starvation, electrolyte imbalance,
heart failure, and suicide.
Prevention
Short of major long-term changes in the larger
society, the best strategy for prevention of anorexia
is the cultivation of healthy attitudes toward food,
weight control, and beauty (or body image) within
families.