Definition
An anoscopy is an examination of the rectum in
which a small tube is inserted into the anus to screen,
diagnose, and evaluate problems of the anus and anal
canal.
Purpose
This test may be ordered for the evaluation of
perianal or anal pain, hemorrhoids, rectal prolapse,
digital rectal examination that shows a mass, perianal
abscess and condyloma (a wart-like growth). An anascopy may be performed to check for abnormal openings between the anus and the skin, or anal fissures.
The test is also used to diagnose rectal cancer.
Precautions
Anoscopy should not be performed on patients
with acute cardiovascular problems due to the vasovagal reaction it may cause. This test is also not recommended for patients with acute abdominal problems
and those with a constricted or narrowed anal canal.
Description
Anoscopy views the anus and anal canal by using
an anoscope. An anoscope is a plastic, tube-shaped
speculum that is a smaller version of a sigmoidscope.
Before the anoscope is used, the doctor completes a
digital rectal examination with a lubricated, gloved
index finger. The anoscope is then lubricated and
gently inserted a few inches into the rectum. This
procedure enlarges the rectum to allow the doctor to
view the entire anal canal with a light. If any suspicious
areas are noticed, a piece of tissue can be biopsied.
During the anoscopy procedure there may be a
feeling of pressure or the need to go to the bathroom.
If a biopsy is taken, the patient may feel a slight pinch.
The procedure is performed on an out-patient basis,
and takes approximately an hour to complete.
Preparation
The patient will be instructed to clear their rectum
of stool before the procedure. This may be done by
taking a laxative, enema, or other preparation that
may help with the evacuation.
Aftercare
If a biopsy is needed during an anoscopy, there may
be slight anal bleeding for less than two days following
the procedure. The patient may be instructed to sit in a
bathtub of warm water for 10 to 15 minutes, three
times a day, to help decrease the pain and swelling.
Risks
A simple anoscopy procedure offers minimal
risks. There is a limited risk of bleeding and mild
pain is a biopsy is performed.
Normal results
Normal values to look for during an anoscopy
include an anal canal that appears healthy in size,
color, and shape. The test also looks for no evidence of
bleeding, polyps, hemorrhoids or other abnormalities.
Abnormal results
While an anoscopy is typically performed to
determine is hemorrhoids are present, other abnormal
finding could include polyps, abscesses, inflammation,
fissures, colorectal polyps, or cancer.