Definition
Anticoagulants are drugs used to prevent clot formation or to prevent a clot that has formed from enlarging. They inhibit clot formation by blocking the action
of clotting factors or platelets. Anticoagulant drugs fall
into three categories: inhibitors of clotting factor synthesis, inhibitors of thrombin and antiplatelet drugs.
Purpose
Anticoagulant drugs reduce the ability of the blood
to form clots. Although blood clotting is essential to
prevent serious bleeding in the case of skin cuts, clots
inside the blood vessels block the flow of blood to major
organs and cause heart attacks and strokes. Although
these drugs are sometimes called blood thinners, they
do not actually thin the blood. Furthermore, this type
of medication will not dissolve clots that already have
formed, although the drug stops an existing clot from
worsening. However, another type of drug, used in
thrombolytic therapy, will dissolve existing clots.
Anticoagulant drugs are used for a number of conditions. For example, they may be given to prevent blood
clots from forming after the replacement of a heart valve
or to reduce the risk of a stroke or another heart attack
after a first heart attack. They are also used to reduce the
chance of blood clots forming during open heart surgery
or bypass surgery. Low doses of these drugs may be
given to prevent blood clots in patients who must stay in
bed for a long time after certain types of surgery.
Because anticoagulants affect the blood’s ability
to clot, they can increase the risk of severe bleeding
and heavy blood loss. It is thus essential to take these
drugs exactly as directed and to see a physician regularly as long as they are prescribed.
Description
Anticoagulant drugs, also called anticlotting drugs
or blood thinners, are available only with a physician’s
prescription. They come in tablet and injectable forms.
They fall into three groups:

Inhibitors of clotting factor synthesis. These anticoagulants inhibit the production of certain clotting
factors in the liver. One example is warfarin (brand
name: coumadin).

Inhibitors of thrombin. Thrombin inhibitors interfere
with blood clotting by blocking the activity of thrombin. They include heparin, lepirudin (Refludan).

Antiplatelet drugs. Antiplatelet drugs interact with
platelets, which is a type of blood cell, to block platelets from aggregating into harmful clots. They include:
aspirin, ticlopidine (Ticlid), clopidogrel (Plavix), tirofiban (Aggrastat), and eptifibatide (Integrilin).
Recommended dosage
The recommended dosage depends on the type of
anticoagulant drug and the medical condition for
which it is prescribed. The prescribing physician or
the pharmacist who filled the prescription can provide
information concerning the correct dosage. Usually,
the physician will adjust the dose after checking the
patient’s clotting time.
Anticoagulant drugs must be taken exactly as directed by the physician. Larger or more frequent doses
should not be taken, and the drug should also not be
taken for longer than prescribed. Taking too much of this
medication can cause severe bleeding. Anticoagulants
should also be taken on schedule. A record of each
dose should be kept as it is taken. If a dose is missed, it
should be taken as soon as possible followed by the
regular dose schedule. However, a patient who forgets
to take a missed dose until the next day should not take
the missed dose at all and should not double the next
dose, as this could lead to bleeding. A record of all
missed doses should be kept for the prescribing physician who should be informed at the scheduled visits.
Precautions
Persons who take anticoagulants should see a physician regularly while taking these drugs, particularly at
the beginning of therapy. The physician will order periodic blood tests to check the blood’s clotting ability. The
results of these tests will help the physician determine the
proper amount of medication to be taken each day.
Time is required for normal clotting ability to
return after anticoagulant treatment. During this period, patients must observe the same precautions they
observed while taking the drug. The length of time
needed for the blood to return to normal depends on
the type of anticoagulant drug that was taken. The
prescribing physician will advise as to how long the
precautions should be observed.
People who are taking anticoagulant drugs should
tell all physicians, dentists, pharmacists, and other
medical professionals who provide medical treatments
or services to them that they are taking such a medication. They should also carry identification stating that
they are using an anticoagulant drug.
Other prescription drugs or over-the-counter
medicine–especially aspirin–should be not be taken
without the prescribing physician being informed.
Because of the risk of heavy bleeding, anyone who
takes an anticoagulant drug must take care to avoid
injuries. Sports and other potentially hazardous activities should be avoided. Any falls, blows to the body or
head, or other injuries should be reported to a physician,
as internal bleeding may occur without any obvious
symptoms. Special care should be taken in shaving
and in brushing and flossing the teeth. Soft toothbrushes should be used and the flossing should be very
gentle. Electric razors should be used instead of a blade.
Alcohol can change the way anticoagulant drugs
affect the body. Anyone who takes this medicine
should not have more than one to two drinks at any
time and should not drink alcohol every day.
Special conditions
People with specific medical conditions or who are
taking certain other medicines can have problems if
they take anticoagulant drugs. Before taking these
drugs, the prescribing physician should be informed
about any of these conditions:
 ALLERGIES. Anyone who has had unusual reactions to anticoagulants in the past should let his or
her physician know before taking the drugs again. The
physician should also be told about any allergies to
beef, pork, or other foods; dyes; preservatives; or other
substances.
 PREGNANCY. Anticoagulants may cause many
serious problems if taken during pregnancy. Birth
defects, severe bleeding in the fetus, and other problems that affect the physical or mental development
of the fetus or newborn are possible. The mother may
also experience severe bleeding if she takes anticoagulants during pregnancy, during delivery, or even
shortly after delivery. Women should not take start
taking anticoagulants during pregnancy and should not
become pregnant while taking it. Any woman who
becomes pregnant or suspects that she has become pregnant while taking an anticoagulant should check with
her physician immediately.
 BREASTFEEDING. Some anticoagulant drugs may
pass into breast milk. Blood tests can be done on
nursing babies to see whether the drug is causing any
problems. If it is, other medication may be prescribed
to counteract the effects of the anticoagulant drug.
OTHER MEDICAL CONDITIONS. Before using anticoagulant drugs, people should inform their physician
about any medical problems they have. They should
also let the physician who prescribed the medicine
know if they are being treated by any other medical
physician or dentist. In addition, people who will be
taking anticoagulant drugs should let their physician
know if they have recently had any of the following:

fever lasting more than one to two days

severe or continuing diarrhea

childbirth

heavy or unusual menstrual bleeding

insertion of an intrauterine contraceptive device
(IUD)

falls, injuries, or blows to the body or head

any type of surgery, including dental surgery

spinal anesthesia

radiation treatment
USE OF CERTAIN FOODS AND MEDICINES. Many
foods and drugs may affect the way the anticoagulant
drugs work or may increase the risk of side effects.
Side effects
The most common minor side effects are bloating or
gas. These problems usually go away as the body adjusts
to the drug and do not require medical treatment.
More serious side effects may occur, especially if
excessive anticoagulant is taken. If any of the following side effects occur, a physician should be notified
immediately:

bleeding gums

sores or white spots in the mouth or throat

unusual bruises or purplish areas on the skin

unexplained nosebleeds

unusually heavy bleeding or oozing from wounds

unexpected or unusually menstrual bleeding

blood in the urine

cloudy or dark urine

painful or difficult urination or sudden decrease in
amount of urine

black, tarry, or bloody stools

coughing up blood

vomiting blood or something that looks like coffee
grounds

constipation

pain or swelling in the stomach or abdomen

back pain

stiff, swollen, or painful joints

painful, bluish or purplish fingers or toes

puffy or swollen eyelids, face, feet, or lower legs

changes in the color of the face

skin rash, itching, or hives

yellow eyes or skin

severe or continuing headache

sore throat and fever, with or without chills

breathing problems or wheezing

tightness in the chest

dizziness

unusual tiredness or weakness

weight gain.
In addition, patients taking anticoagulant drugs
should check with their physicians as soon as possible
if any of these side effects occur:

nausea or vomiting

diarrhea

stomach pain or cramps.
Other side effects may occur. Anyone who has
unusual symptoms while taking anticoagulant drugs
should get in touch with his or her physician.
Interactions
Anticoagulants may interact with many other medications. When this happens, the effects of one or both
of the drugs may change or the risk of side effects may
be increased. Anyone who takes anticoagulants should
inform the prescribing physician about other prescription
or nonprescription (over-the-counter medicines) he or she
is taking–even aspirin, laxatives, vitamins, and antacids.
Diet also affects the way anticoagulant drugs work
in the body. A normal, balanced diet should be followed
every day while taking such medication. No dietary
changes should be made without informing first the
prescribing physician, who should also be told of any
illness or other condition interfering with the ability to
eat normally. Diet is a very important consideration
because the amount of vitamin K in the body affects
how anticoagulant drugs work. Dicoumarol and warfarin act by reducing the effects of vitamin K. Vitamin K
is found in meats, dairy products, leafy, green vegetables, and some multiple vitamins and nutritional supplements. For the drugs to work properly, it is best to have
the same amount of vitamin K in the body all the time.
Foods containing vitamin K in the diet should not be
increased or decreased without consulting with the prescribing physician. If the patient takes vitamin supplements, he should check the label to see if it contains
vitaminK.Because vitaminK is also produced by intestinal bacteria, a severe case of diarrhea or the use of
laxatives may also alter a person’s vitamin K levels.