Definition
Antigas agents are medicines that relieve the
uncomfortable symptoms of too much gas in the stomach and intestines.
Purpose
Excess gas can build up in the stomach and intestines for a number of reasons. Eating high-fiber foods,
such as beans, grains, and vegetables is one cause.
Some people unconsciously swallow air when they
eat, drink, chew gum, or smoke cigarettes, which can
lead to uncomfortable amounts of gas in the digestive
system. Surgery and certain medical conditions, such
as irritable colon, peptic ulcer, and diverticulosis, can
also lead to gas build-up. Certain intestinal parasites
can contribute to the production of severe gas - these
parasites need to be treated separately with special
drugs. Abdominal pain, pressure, bloating, and flatulence are signs of too much gas. Antigas agents help
relieve the symptoms by preventing the formation of
gas pockets and breaking up gas that already is
trapped in the stomach and intestines.
Description
Antigas agents are sold as capsules, liquids, and
tablets (regular and chewable) and can be bought without a physician’s prescription. Some commonly used
brands are Gas-X, Flatulex, Mylanta Gas Relief,
Di-Gel, and Phazyme. The ingredient that helps relieve
excess gas is simethicone. Simethicone does not relieve
acid indigestion, but some products also contain antacids for that purpose. Check the label of the product or
ask the pharmacist for more information.
Recommended dosage
Check the product container for dosing information. Typically, the doses should be taken after meals
and at bedtime. Chewable forms should be chewed
thoroughly.
Check with a physician before giving this medicine to children under age 12 years.
Precautions
Some anti-gas medicines may contain sugar,
sodium, or other ingredients. Anyone who is on a
special diet or is allergic to any foods, dyes,
preservatives, or other substances should check with
his or her physician or pharmacist before using any of
these products.
Anyone who has had unusual reactions to
simethicone – the active ingredient in antigas medicines – should check with his or her physician before
taking these drugs.
Side effects
No common or serious side effects have been
reported in people who use this medicine. However,
anyone who has unusual symptoms after taking an
antigas agent should get in touch with his or her
physician.
Interactions
Antigas agents are not known to interact with any
other drugs.