Definition
Anti-hyperuricemic drugs are used to treat hyperuricemia, the state of having too much uric acid in the
blood.
Purpose
Anti-hyperuricemic drugs decrease the levels
of uric acid in the blood, either by increasing
the rate at which uric acid is excreted in the
urine, or by preventing the formation of excess
uric acid.
Precautions
Before taking any medication, patients should
notify their physician of all other medications that
they are currently taking. Patients should also notify
their physician of any health problems they are currently experiencing. Patients must notify physicians if
they have kidney problems, since this might affect the
type of drug administered. Patients must also notify
their physician if they are allergic to any of the medications used to treat acute or long-term gout. Since all
of these factors contribute to the disease, patients
suffering from gout should attempt to lose weight,
avoid excess alcohol consumption, and avoid foods
high in purines, such as asparagus, sardines, lobster,
avocado, and peas.
Description
Gout and hyperuricemia
Persons with high levels of uric acid (hyperuricemia) may experience gout. Commonly gout occurs in
males in their 40s and 50s. Gout is defined by the
attacks of (arthritic) painful, reddened joints, and is
often accompanied by hard lumps in the painful joints.
The most common joint affected is the big toe. Kidney
stones, and/or poor kidney function may also be associated with hyperuricemia, but may not be considered
gout if the patient does not have painful joints. In
persons with gout (and associated symptoms), uric
acid forms crystals, which then cause the aforementioned symptoms. Although uric acid levels must be
high in order for patients to have crystals form, and
therefore have gout, most persons with high uric acid
levels don’t ever have symptoms. Thus, recent criteria
for use of anti-hyperuricemic agents suggest that
patients who have never experienced symptoms of
gout should not receive drug therapy, unless their
hyperuricemia is associated with cancer (may lead to
kidney damage) or certain rare genetic disorders
(McGill, Rheumatologist, University of Sydney,
Australia, 2000).
Acute gout attacks
When patients experience acute attacks of
gout, drugs that lower the levels of uric acid can
cause an acute gout attack or cause an attack to
become more severe. Thus, drugs that lower uric
acid levels and are used to treat gout in the long
term are not used in the short term. Medications
used in acute gout attacks include non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (such as indomethacin),
colchicine, and corticosteroids. Colchicine causes
side effects in a large number of individuals
(usually diarhhea). The most important factor in
the effective treatment of gout may not be the drug
used, but how quickly it is administered after an
acute attack has begun.
Long-term treatment
Long-term treatment of gout or hyperuricemia
usually involves one of four drugs: allopurinol,
probenicid, sulphinpyrazone, or benzbromarone
(as of 2001, benzbromarone was not available for
use in the United States). While allopurinol
decreases the amount of uric acid that is produced
(and may help prevent acute attacks of gout), the
other drugs all increase the rate at which uric acid
is excreted in the urine. As previously mentioned,
lowering the concentration of uric acid can cause
gout attacks. Thus, patients taking these medications should have the dose slowly increased (and
uric acid levels slowly lowered) to prevent acute
attacks of gout. Patients may also be treated with
colchicine or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs to prevent acute attacks of gout (corticosteroids are not used in this scenario because over the
long term corticosteroids have deleterious side
effects). In 2004, the FDA was seeking trial data
on a new drug called oxypurinol (Oxyprim) for
treating chronic gout. These medications may
have to be taken for life to prevent further gout
attacks.