Definition
Systemic antifungal drugs are medicines taken by
mouth or by injection to treat deep infections caused
by a fungus.
Purpose
Systemic antifungal drugs are used to treat
infections in various parts of the body that are
caused by a fungus. A fungus is an organism that
can be either one-celled or filamentous. Unlike a
plant, which makes its own food, or an animal,
which eats plants or other animals, a fungus survives by invading and living off other living things.
Fungi thrive in moist, dark places, including some
parts of the body.
Fungal infections can either be systemic, meaning
that the infection is deep, or topical (dermatophytic),
meaning that the infection is superficial and occurs on
the skin. Additionally, yeast infections can affect the
mucous membranes of the body. Fungal infections on
the skin are usually treated with creams or ointments
(topical antifungal drugs). However, systemic infections, yeast infections or topical infections that do
not clear up after treatment with creams or ointments
may need to be treated with systemic antifungal drugs.
These drugs are used, for example, to treat common
fungal infections such as tinea (ringworm), which
occurs on the skin or candidiasis (a yeast infection,
also known as trush), which can occur in the throat,
in the vagina, or in other parts of the body. They are
also used to treat other deep fungal infections such as
histoplasmosis, blastomycosis, and aspergillosis, which
can affect the lungs and other organs. They are sometimes used to prevent or treat fungal infections in
people whose immune systems are weakened, such as
bone marrow or organ transplant patients and people
with AIDS.
Description
Antifungal drugs are categorized depending on
their route or site of action, their mechanism of action
and their chemical nature.
Systemic antifungal drugs, such as capsofungin
(Cancidas), flucytosine, fluconazole (Diflucan), itraconazole (Sporanox), ketoconazole (Nizoral), and
miconazole (Monistat I.V.) are available only by prescription. They are available in tablet, capsule, liquid,
and injectable forms.
Recommended dosage
The recommended dosage depends on the type of
antifungal drug and the nature and extent of fungal
infection being treated. Doses may also be different for
different patients. The prescribing physician or the
pharmacist can provide dosage information.
Systemic antifungal drugs must be taken exactly as
directed. Itraconazole and ketoconazole should be
taken with food.
Fungal infections can take a long time to clear up,
so it may be necessary to take the medication for several
months, or even for a year or longer. It is very important to keep taking the medicine for as long as the
physician says to take it, even if symptoms seem to
improve. If the drug is stopped too soon, the symptoms
may return.
Systemic antifungal drugs work best when their
amount is kept constant in the body, meaning that
they have to be taken regularly, at the same time
every day, and without missing any doses.
Patients taking the liquid form of ketoconazole
should use a specially marked medicine spoon or other
medicine measuring device to make sure they take the
correct amount. A regular household teaspoon may
not hold the right amount of medicine. Ask the pharmacists about ways to accurately measure the dose of
these drugs.
Precautions
If symptoms do not improve within a few weeks,
the prescribing physician should be informed.
While taking this medicine, regular medical visits
should be scheduled. The physician needs to keep
checking for side effects throughout the antifungal
therapy.
Some people feel drowsy or dizzy while taking
systemic antifungal drugs. Anyone who takes these
drugs should not drive, use machines or do anything
else that might be dangerous until they have found out
how the drugs affect them.
Liver problems, stomach problems and other problems may occur in people who drink alcohol while
taking systemic antifungal drugs. Alcohol and prescription or nonprescription (over-the-counter) drugs
that contain alcohol should be avoided while taking
antifungal drugs. (Medicines that may contain alcohol
include some cough syrups, tonics, and elixirs.)
Alcohol should be avoided for at least a day after
taking an antifungal drug.
The antifungal drug ketoconazole may make the
eyes unusually sensitive to light. Wearing sunglasses
and avoiding exposure to bright light may help.
Special conditions
People with certain medical conditions or who
are taking certain other medicines can have problems if they take systemic antifungal drugs.
Before taking these drugs, the prescribing physician
should be informed about any of the following
conditions:
 ALLERGIES. Anyone who has had unusual reactions to systemic antifungal drugs in the past should
let his or her physician know about the problem before
taking the drugs again. The physician should also be
told about any allergies to foods, dyes, preservatives,
or other substances.
 PREGNANCY. In laboratory studies of animals,
systemic antifungal drugs have caused birth defects
and other problems in the mother and fetus.
Studies have not been done on pregnant women,
so it is not known whether these drugs cause similar effects in people. Women who are pregnant or
who plan to become pregnant should check with
their physicians before taking systemic antifungal
drugs. Any woman who becomes pregnant while
taking these drugs should let her physician know
immediately.
 BREASTFEEDING. Systemic antifungal drugs pass
into breast milk. Women who are breastfeeding
should check with their physicians before using systemic antifungal drugs.
OTHER MEDICAL CONDITIONS. People who have
medical conditions that deplete stomach acid (achlorhydria) or decrease stomach acid (hypochlorhydria)
should be sure to inform their physicians about their
condition before they use a systemic antifungal drug.
These drugs are not active in their natural form, but
must be converted to the active form by an acid. If
these is not enough stomach acid, the drugs will be
ineffective. For people with insufficient stomach acid,
it may help to take the medicine with an acidic drink,
such as a cola. The patient’s health care provider can
suggest the best way to take the medicine.
Before using systemic antifungal drugs, people
with any of these medical problems should also make
sure their physicians are aware of their conditions:

current or past alcohol abuse

liver disease

kidney disease
USE OF CERTAIN MEDICINES. Taking systemic antifungal drugs with certain other drugs may affect the
way the drugs work or may increase the chance of side
effects.
Side effects
Fluconazole
Although rare, severe allergic reactions to this
medicine have been reported. Call a physician immediately if any of these symptoms develop after taking
fluconazole (Diflucan):

hives, itching, or swelling

breathing or swallowing problems

sudden drop in blood pressure

diarrhea

abdominal pain
Ketoconazole
Ketoconazole has caused anaphylaxis (a lifethreatening allergic reaction) in some people after
their first dose. This is a rare reaction.
Systemic antifungal drugs in general
Systemic antifungal drugs may cause serious and
possibly life-threatening liver damage. Patients who
take these drugs should have liver function tests before
they start taking the medicine and as often as their
physician recommends while they are taking it. The
physician should be notified immediately if any of
these symptoms develop:

loss of appetite

nausea or vomiting

yellow skin or eyes

unusual fatigue

dark urine

pale stools
The most common minor side effects of systemic
antifungal drugs are constipation, diarrhea, nausea,
vomiting, headache, drowsiness, dizziness, and flushing of the face or skin. These problems usually go
away as the body adjusts to the drug and do not
require medical treatment. Less common side effects,
such as menstrual problems in women, breast enlargement in men, and decreased sexual ability in men
also may occur and do not need medical attention
unless they do not improve in a reasonable amount
of time.
More serious side effects are not common, but
may occur. If any of the following side effects occur,
check with the physician who prescribed the medicine
immediately:

fever and chills

skin rash or itching

high blood pressure

pain, redness, or swelling at site of injection (for
injectable miconazole)
Other rare side effects are possible. Anyone who
has unusual symptoms after taking systemic antifungal drugs should get in touch with his or her physician.
Interactions
Serious and possibly life-threatening side effects
can result if the oral forms of itraconazole or ketoconazole or the injectable form of miconazole are taken
with certain drugs. Do not take those types of
systemic antifungal drugs with any of the following
drugs unless the physician approves of the therapy:

astemizole (Hismanal)

cisapride (Propulsid)

antacids

theophylline-containing anti-wheezing medications
Taking an acid blocker such as cimetidine
(Tagamet), famotidine (Pepcid), nizatidine (Axid),
omeprazole (Prilosec), or ranitidine (Zantac) at the
same time as a systemic antifungal drug may prevent
the antifungal drug from working properly. For best
results, take the acid blocker at least 2 hours after
taking the antifungal drug.
In addition, systemic antifungal drugs may interact with many other medicines. When this happens,
the effects of one or both of the drugs may change or
the risk of side effects may be greater. Anyone who
takes systemic antifungal drugs should inform the prescribing physician about all other prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines he or she is
taking. Among the drugs that may interact with systemic antifungal drugs are:

acetaminophen (Tylenol)

birth control pills

male hormones (androgens)

female hormones (estrogens)

medicine for other types of infections

antidepressants

antihistamines

muscle relaxants

medicine for diabetes, such as tolbutamide (Orinase),
glyburide (DiaBeta), and glipizide (Glucotrol)

blood-thinning medicine, such as warfarin (Coumadin)
The list above does not include every drug that
may interact with systemic antifungal drugs. Be sure
to check with a physician or pharmacist before combining systemic antifungal drugs with any other
medicine.