Definition
Antituberculosis drugs are medicines used to treat
tuberculosis, an infectious disease that can affect the
lungs and other organs.
Purpose
Tuberculosis is a disease caused by Mycobacterium
tuberculae, a bacteria that is passed between people
through the air. The disease can be cured with proper
drug therapy, but because the bacteria may become
resistant to any single drug, combinations of antituberculosis drugs are used to treat tuberculosis (TB) are
normally required for effective treatment. At the start
of the 20th Century, tuberculosis was the most common
cause of death in the United States, but was laregly
eliminated with better living conditions. It is most common in areas of crowding and poor ventilation, suich as
crowded urban areas and prisons. In some areas, the
AIDS epidemic has been accompanied by an increase
in the prevalence of tuberculosis.
Some antituberculosis drugs also are used to treat
or prevent other infections such as Mycobacterium
avium complex (MAC), which causes disease throughout the bodies of people with AIDS or other diseases
of the immune system.
Description
Antituberculosis drugs are available only with a
physician’s prescription and come in tablet, capsule,
liquid and injectable forms. Some commonly used
antituberculosis drugs are cycloserine (Seromycin),
ethambutol (Myambutol), ethionamide (TrecatorSC), isoniazid (Nydrazid, Laniazid), pyrazinamide,
rifabutin (Mycobutin), and rifampin (Rifadin,
Rimactane).
Recommended dosage
The recommended dosage depends on the type of
antituberculosis drug and may be different for different patients. Check with the physician who prescribed
the medicine or the pharmacist who filled the prescription for the proper dosage. The physician may gradually increase the dosage during treatment. Be sure to
follow the physician’s orders. Patients who are infected
with HIV must usually take larger combinations of
drugs for a longer period of time than is needed for
patients with an unimpaired immune system.
Some antituberculosis drugs must be taken with
other drugs. If they are taken alone, they may encourage the bacteria that cause tuberculosis to become
resistant to drugs used to treat the disease. When the
bacteria become resistant, treating the disease
becomes more difficult.
To clear up tuberculosis completely, antituberculosis drugs must be taken for as long as directed. This
may mean taking the medicine every day for a year or
two or even longer. Symptoms may improve very
quickly after treatment with this medicine begins.
However, they may come back if the medicine is
stopped too quickly. Do not stop taking the medicine
just because symptoms improve.
Because people may neglect to take their medication for tuberculosis, it is common to have tuberculosis centers develop a program of Directly Observed
Therapy (DOT.) In these programs, patients come to
the hospital or clinic, and take their medication in
front of an observer. These programs may be annoying to the patients, but are justified by the risks to
public health if tuberculosis germs which have become
resistant to drugs were to be spread.
Cycloserine works best when it is at constant
levels in the blood. To help keep levels constant, take
the medicine in doses spaced evenly through the day
and night. Do not miss any doses. If taking medicine at
night interferes with sleep, or if it is difficult to
remember to take the medicine during the day, check
with a health care professional for suggestions.
Do not take antacids that contain aluminum, such
as Maalox, within 1 hour of taking isoniazid, as this
may keep the medicine from working.
Precautions
Seeing a physician regularly while taking antituberculosis drugs is important. The physician will check
to make sure the medicine is working as it should and
will watch for unwanted side effects. These visits also
will help the physician know if the dosage needs to be
changed.
Symptoms should begin to improve within a few
weeks after treatment begins with antituberculosis
drugs. If they do not, or if they become worse, check
with a physician.
Some people feel drowsy, dizzy, confused, or less
alert when using these drugs. Some may also cause
vision changes, clumsiness, or unsteadiness. Because
of these possible problems, anyone who takes antituberculosis drugs should not drive, use machines, or do
anything else that might be dangerous until they have
found out how the medicine affects them.
Daily doses of pyridoxine (vitamin B6) may lessen
or prevent some side effects of ethionamide or isoniazid.
If the physician who prescribed the medicine recommends this, be sure to take the pyridoxine every day.
Certain kinds of cheese (such as Swiss and
Cheshire) and fish (such as tuna and skipjack) may
cause an unusual reaction in people taking isoniazid.
Symptoms of this reaction include fast or pounding
heartbeat, sweating or a hot feeling, chills or a clammy
feeling, headache, lightheadedness, and red or itchy skin.
This reaction is very rare. However, if any of these symptoms occur, check with a physician as soon as possible.
Rifabutin and rifampin will make saliva, sweat,
tears, urine, feces, and skin turn reddish orange to
reddish brown. This is nothing to worry about.
However, the discolored tears may permanently stain
soft contact lenses (but not hard contact lenses). To
avoid ruining contact lenses, do not wear soft contacts
while taking these medicines.
Rifampin may temporarily lower the number of
white blood cells. Because the white blood cells are
important in fighting infection, this effect increases the
chance of getting an infection. This drug also may
lower the number of platelets that play an important
role in clotting. To reduce the risk of bleeding and
infection in the mouth while taking this medicine, be
especially careful when brushing and flossing the
teeth. Check with a physician or dentist for suggestions on how to keep the teeth and mouth clean without causing injuries. Put off any dental work until
blood counts return to normal.
Rifampin may affect the results of some medical
tests. Before having medical tests, anyone taking this
medicine should alert the health care professional in
charge.
People who have certain medical conditions may
have problems if they take antituberculosis drugs. For
example:
 cycloserine or isoniazid may increase the risk of seizures (convulsions) in people with a history of
seizures.
 the dosage of cycloserine may need to be adjusted for
people with kidney disease.
 ethambutol or pyrazinamide may cause or worsen
attacks of gout in people who are prone to having
them.
 ethambutol may cause or worsen eye damage.
 diabetes may be harder to control in patients who
take ethionamide.
 isoniazid may cause false results on some urine sugar
tests, and pyrazinamide may cause false results on
urine ketone tests. Diabetic patients who either of
these medicines should discuss the possibility of false
test results with their physicians.
 people with liver disease or a history of alcohol
abuse may be more likely to develop hepatitis
when taking isoniazid and are more likely to have
side effects that affect the liver when taking
rifampin.
 in people with kidney disease, ethambutol, ethionamide, or isoniazid may be more likely to cause side
effects.
 side effects are also more likely in people with liver
disease who take pyrazinamide.
Before taking antituberculosis drugs, be sure to let
the physician know about these or any other medical
problems.
In laboratory tests of pregnant animals, high
doses of some antituberculosis drugs have caused
birth defects and other problems in the fetus or newborn. However, pregnant women with tuberculosis
need to take antituberculosis drugs to clear up their
disease. Knowing that many women have had healthy
babies after taking these drugs during pregnancy may
be reassuring. Pregnant women who need to take this
medicine and are worried about birth defects or other
problems should talk to their physicians.
Anyone who has had unusual reactions to antituberculosis drugs or to niacin should let his or her
physician know before taking any antituberculosis
drug. The physician should also be told about any
allergies to foods, dyes, preservatives, or other
substances.
Patients who are on special diets, such as lowsodium or low-sugar diets, should make sure their
physicians know. Some antituberculosis medicines
may contain sodium, sugar, or alcohol.
Side effects
Cycloserine
In some people, this medicine causes depression
and thoughts of suicide. If this happens, check with a
physician immediately. Switching to another medicine
will usually stop these troubling thoughts and feelings.
Also let the physician know immediately about any
other mood or mental changes; such as nervousness,
nightmares, anxiety, confusion, or irritability; and
about symptoms such as muscle twitches, convulsions,
or speech problems.
Headache is a common side effect that usually
goes away as the body adjusts to this medicine. This
problem does not need medical attention unless it
continues or it interferes with everyday life.
Ethambutol
This medicine may cause eye pain or vision
changes, including loss of vision or changes in color
vision. Check with a physician immediately if any of
these problems develop.
In addition, anyone who has any of these symptoms while taking ethambutol should check with a
physician immediately:
 painful or swollen joints, especially in the knee,
ankle, or big toe
 a tight, hot sensation in the skin over painful or
swollen joints
 chills.
Other side effects may occur but do not need
medical attention unless they are bothersome or they
do not go away as the body adjusts to the medicine.
These include: headache, confusion, nausea and
vomiting, stomach pain, and loss of appetite.
Ethionamide
Check with a physician immediately if eye pain,
blurred vision, or other vision changes occur while
taking this medicine.
Symptoms such as unsteadiness, clumsiness and
pain, numbness, tingling, or burning in the hands or
feet could be the first signs of nerve problems that may
become more serious. If any of these symptoms occur,
check with a physician immediately. Other side effects
that should be brought to a physician’s attention
immediately include yellow eyes or skin and mood or
mental changes such as depression or confusion.
Less serious side effects such as dizziness, nausea
or vomiting, appetite loss, sore mouth, or metallic
taste may also occur. These problems usually go
away as the body adjusts to the medicine. They do
not need medical attention unless they continue or
they interfere with normal activities.
Isoniazid
This medicine may cause serious liver damage, especially in people over 40 years of age. However, taking
medicine for tuberculosis is very important for people
with the disease. Anyone who has tuberculosis and has
been advised to take this drug should thoroughly discuss
treatment options with his or her physician.
Recognizing the early signs of liver and nerve
damage can help prevent the problems from getting
worse. If any of these symptoms occur, check with a
physician immediately:
 unusual tiredness or weakness
 clumsiness or unsteadiness
 pain, numbness, tingling, or burning in the hands
and feet
 loss of appetite
 vomiting
This medicine may also cause less serious side
effects such as diarrhea and stomach pain. These usually
go away as the body adjusts to the medicine and do not
need medical attention unless they continue.
If eye pain, blurred vision, or other vision changes
occur while taking this medicine, check with a physician immediately.
Pyrazinamide
Check with a physician immediately if pain in the
joints occurs.
Rifabutin
Check with a physician immediately if a skin rash
occurs.
Rifampin
Stop taking rifampin and check with a physician
immediately if any of the following symptoms occur.
These symptoms could be early signs of problems that
may become more serious. Getting prompt medical
attention could prevent them from getting worse.
 unusual tiredness or weakness
 nausea or vomiting
 loss of appetite
In addition, anyone who has any of these symptoms while taking rifampin should check with a physician immediately:
 breathing problems
 fever
 chills
 shivering
 headache
 dizziness
 itching
 skin rash or redness
 muscle and bone pain
Other side effects, such as diarrhea and stomach
pain, may occur with this medicine, but should go
away as the body adjusts to the drug. Medical treatment is not necessary unless these problems continue.
Other side effects may occur with any antituberculosis drug. Anyone who has unusual symptoms
while taking an antituberculosis drug should get in
touch with his or her physician.
Interactions
Taking cycloserine and ethionamide together may
increase the risk of seizures and other nervous system
problems. These and other side effects also are more
likely in people who drink alcohol while taking cycloserine. To avoid these problems, do not drink alcohol
while taking cycloserine and check with a physician
before combining cycloserine and ethionamide.
Drinking alcohol regularly may prevent isoniazid
from working properly and may increase the chance of
liver damage. Anyone taking this medicine should
strictly limit the use of alcohol. Check with a health
care professional for advice on the amount of alcohol
that may safely be used.
Many drugs may interact with isoniazid or rifampin,
increasing the chance ofliver damage or other side effects.
Among these drugs are acetaminophen (Tylenol), birth
control pills and other drugs that contain female hormones, and the antiseizure drugs divalproex (Depakote)
and valproic acid (Depakene). For a complete list of
drugs that may have this effect, check with a pharmacist.
Isoniazid may also decrease the effects of the antifungal drug ketoconazole (Nizoral) and the antituberculosis drug rifampin (Rifadin).
Rifampin may make many drugs less effective.
Among the drugs that may be affected are diabetes
medicines taken by mouth (oral hypoglycemics), digitalis heart drugs, many antifungal drugs, and birth
control pills. Because it makes birth control pills less
effective, taking rifampin may increase the chance of
becoming pregnant. Women who take this medicine
along with birth control pills should use an additional
form of birth control. For a complete list of drugs that
may be affected by rifampin, check with a pharmacist.
Using rifabutin with the antiretroviral drug zidovudine (AZT, Retrovir) may make the zidovudine less
effective. Consult with a physician if both drugs are
prescribed.
Not every drug that may interact with an antituberculosis drug is listed here. Be sure to check with a
physician or pharmacist before combining an antituberculosis drug with any other prescription or nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicine.