Definition
Antidepressant drugs are medicines that relieve
symptoms of depressive disorders.
Purpose
Depressive disorders may either be unipolar
(depression alone) or bipolar (depression alternating
with periods of extreme excitation). The formal diagnosis requires a cluster of symptoms, lasting at least
two weeks. These symptoms include, but are not limited to, mood changes, insomnia or hypersomnia, and
diminished interest in daily activities. The symptoms
are not caused by any medical condition, drug side
effect, or adverse life event. The condition is severe
enough to cause clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Secondary depression, or depression caused by
unfavorable life events, is normally self limiting, and
may best be treated with cognitive/behavioral therapy
rather than drugs.
Description
Antidepressant agents act by increasing the levels
of excitatory neurostransmitters, or nerve cell chemicals
that act as messengers in the brain’s nervous system. In
2003, a report showed that in addition to treating
depression, use of antidepressant drugs may protect
the brain from damage depressive episodes cause to
the hippocampus, the area of the brain involved in
learning and memory. Antidepressant drugs may be
prescribed as a first-line treatment for depression, or
in conjunction with other methods of controlling
depression, such as behavioral therapy and exercise.
The main types of antidepressant drugs in use
today are listed below, though the drugs available
change frequently. For example, in mid-2003, the
manufacturer of Wellbutrin released Wellbutrin XL,
the only once-daily norepinephrine and dopamine
reuptake inhibitor for treating depression in adults.

tricyclic antidepressants, such as amitriptyline (Elavil),
imipramine (Tofranil), nortriptyline (Pamelor)

selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs or
serotonin boosters), such as fluoxetine (Prozac), paroxetine (Paxil), and sertraline (Zoloft)

monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAO inhibitors), such
as phenelzine (Nardil), and tranylcypromine (Parnate)
tetracyclic compounds and atypical antidepressants
which do not fall into any of the above categories
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors maintain
levels of the excitatory neurohormone serotonin in the
brain. They do not alter levels of norepinephrine. These
have become the drugs of choice for a variety of psychiatric disorders, primarily because of their low incidence of severe side effects as compared with other drugs
in this therapeutic class. SSRIs show similar actions and
side effect profiles, but may vary in duration of action.
Tricyclic compounds, identified by their chemical
structure containing three carbon rings, are an older
class of antidepressants. Although generally effective,
they have a high incidence of anticholinergic effects,
notably dry mouth and dry eyes, which can cause
discomfort. They also cause cardiac arrythmias.
Because tricyclics act on both serotonin and norepinephrine, they may have some value in treatment of
patients who fail to respond to SSRIs. Drugs in this
class often are available at low prices, which may be
significant when cost is a major factor in treatment.
They also have been found useful in control of some
neurologic pain syndromes.
Tricyclic antidepressants are similar, but may vary
in severity of side effects, most notably the degree of
sedation and the extent of the anticholinergic effects.
Tetracyclic compounds and atypical antidepressants are chemically distinct from both the major
groups and each other. Although maprotilene (no
brand name, marketed in generic form only) and mirtazepine (Remeron) are similar in chemical structures,
they differ in their balance of activity on serotonine
and norepinephrine levels.
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (phenelzine
[Nardil], tranylcypromine [Parnate]) have largely
been supplanted in therapy because of their high risk
of severe adverse effects, most notably severe hypertension. They act by inhibiting the enzyme monoamine
oxidase, which is responsible for the metabolism of the
stimulatory neurohormones norepinephrine, epinephrine, dopamine, and serotonin. The MAOIs are
normally reserved for patients who are resistant to
safer drugs. Two drugs, eldepryl (Carbex, used in
treatment of Parkinson’s disease) and the herb,
St. John’s wort, have some action against monoamine oxidase B, and have shown some value as antidepressants. They do not share the same risks as the
non-selective MAO inhibitors.
All antidepressant agents, regardless of their
structure, have a slow onset of action, typically three
to five weeks. Although adverse effects may be seen as
early as the first dose, significant therapeutic
improvement is always delayed. Similarly, the effects
of antidepressants will continue for a similar length of
time after the drugs have been discontinued.
Recommended dosage
Dose varies with the specific drug and patient.
Specialized references or a physician should be consulted.
Precautions
Antidepressants have many significant cautions
and adverse effects. Although a few are listed here,
specific references should be consulted for more complete information.
SSRIs. The most common side effect of SSRIs is
excitation and insomnia. Excitation has been reported
in over 20% of patients, and insomnia in 33%.
Significant weight loss has been frequently reported,
but most commonly in patients who are already
underweight. A 2003 report showed that SSRIs also
increase the risk of upper gastrointestinal tract bleeding. SSRIs may cause some sedation, and patients
should be cautioned not to perform tasks requiring
alertness until they have evaluated the effects of these
drugs. SSRIs are pregnancy category C drugs. In 2003,
a new report demonstrated that late-term (third trimester) use of these drugs could cause neurological symptoms in newborns, including tremor, restlessness and
rigidity. Most SSRIs are excreted in breast milk, and
there have been anecdotal reports of drowsiness in
infants whose mothers were taking SSRIs while
breastfeeding.
Most notably, a joint panel of the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) issued strong warnings
to parents and physicians in 2004 about the risk of
suicidal behavior in children and adolescents taking
SSRIs.
Tricyclic antidepressants. Amoxepine (not marketed by brand, generic available), although a tricyclic
antidepressant rather than a neuroleptic (major tranquilizer), displays some of the more serious effects of
the neuroleptics, including tardive dyskinesias (drug
induced involuntary movements) and neuroleptic
malignant syndrome, a potentially fatal syndrome
with symptoms including high fever, altered mental
status, irregular pulse or blood pressure, and changes
in heart rate. These adverse effects have not been
reported with other tricyclic antidepressants.
The most common adverse effects of tricyclic antidepressants are sedation and the anticholinergic
effects, such as dry mouth, dry eyes, and difficult
urination. Alterations in heartbeat also are common,
and may progress to congestive heart failure, stroke,
and sudden death.
Tricyclic antidepressants are in pregnancy categories C or D, although there have been no formal
studies of the drugs on fetal development. There are no
studies of effects on newborns, but some anecdotal
reports of malformations have resulted from animal
studies. The drugs are excreted in breast milk.
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors. The greatest risk
associated with these drugs is a hypertensive crisis
which may be fatal and most often occurs when the
drugs are taken with interacting foods or drugs. More
common adverse reactions may include low blood
pressure and slowing of heartbeat. Sedation and gastrointestinal disturbances also are common. MAOIs
are in pregnancy category C. Safety in breast feeding
has not been established.
Tetracyclics and atypicals. Because these drugs
are individual, there are no group patterns of adverse
reactions. Specific references should be consulted.
Interactions
The antidepressants have many drug interactions,
some severe. Although a few are listed here, specific
references should be consulted for more complete
information.
SSRIs should not be administered with MAOIs.
A wash-out period of about four weeks should be
allowed before switching from one class of drugs to
the other, five weeks if switching from fluoxetine
(Prozac) to an MAOI.
MAOIs have many interactions, however the best
known are those with foods containing the amino acid
tyramine. These include aged cheese, chianti wine, and
many others. Patients and providers should review the
MAOI diet restrictions before using or prescribing
these drugs. Because of the severity of MAOI interactions, all additions to the patient’s drug regimen
should be reviewed with care.
Tricyclic compounds have many interactions, and
specialized references should be consulted.
Specifically, it is best to avoid other drugs with anticholinergic effects. Tricyclics should not be taken with
the antibiotics grepafloxacin and sprafloxacin, since
the combination may cause serious heart arrythmias.
Tricyclic compounds should not be taken with the
gastric acid inhibitor cimetidine (Tagamet), since this
increases the blood levels of the tricyclic compound.
Other acid inhibiting drugs do not share this
interaction.
SSRIs interact with a number of other drugs that
act on the central nervous system. Care should be used
in combining these drugs with major or minor tranquilizers, or with anti-epileptic agents such as phenytoin (Dilantin) or carbamazepine (Tegretol). In 2003,
one of the biggest concerns regarding new prescriptions for tricyclic antidepressants was data concerning
overdoses from these drugs. Information in Great
Britain showed that this class of antidepressants was
responsible for more than 90% of all deaths from
antidepressant overdose. Physicians were being
advised to prescribe SSRIs in new patients, but not
to change the course of those who had taken tricyclics
for years with success.