Definition
Antianxiety drugs are medicines that calm and
relax people with excessive anxiety, nervousness, or
tension, or for short-term control of social phobia
disorder or specific phobia disorder.
Purpose
Antianxiety agents, or anxiolytics, may be used to
treat mild transient bouts of anxiety as well as more
pronounced episodes of social phobia and specific
phobia. Clinically significant anxiety is marked by
several symptoms. The patient experiences marked
or persistent fear of one or more social or performance
situations in which he or she is exposed to unfamiliar
people or possible scrutiny by others, and may react in
a humiliating or embarrassing way. The exposure to
the feared situation produces an anxiety attack. Fear
of these episodes of anxiety leads to avoidance behavior, which impairs normal social functioning, including working or attending classes. The patient is aware
that these fears are unjustified.
Description
In psychiatric practice, treatment of anxiety has
largely turned from traditional antianxiety agents,
anxiolytics, to antidepressant therapies. In current
use, the benzodiazepines, the best known class of anxiolytics, have been largely supplanted by selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). Among the preferred
SSRIs for generalized anxiety disorder are paroxetine
(Paxil), escitalopram (Lexapro), and venlafaxine
(Effexor), which also has norepinephrine. Other
SSRIs are fluoxetine (Prozac) and sertraline (Zoloft).
Venlafaxine and Paroxetine have been shown particularly effective in relieving symptoms of social anxiety.
However, traditional anxiolytics remain useful for
patients who need a rapid onset of action, or whose
frequency of exposure to anxiety provoking stimuli is
low enough to eliminate the need for continued treatment. While SSRIs may require three to five weeks to
show any effects, and must be taken continuously,
benzodiazepines may produce a response within 30
minutes, and may be dosed on an as-needed basis.
The intermediate action benzodiazepines, alprazolam (Xanax), and lorazepam (Ativan) are the appropriate choice for treatment of mild anxiety and social
phobia. Diazepam (Valium) is still widely used for anxiety, but its active metabolite, desmethyldiazepam, which
has a long half-life, may make this a poorer choice than
other drugs in its class. There is considerable variation
between individuals in metabolism of benzodiazepines,
so patient response may not be predictable. As a class,
benzodiazepines are used not only as anxiolytics, but
also as sedatives, muscle relaxants, and in treatment of
epilepsy and alcoholism. The distinctions between these
uses are largely determined by onset and duration of
action, and route of administration.
Buspirone (BuSpar), which is not chemically
related to other classes of central nervous system
drugs, is also a traditional anxiolytic, although it is
now considered either a third line or adjunctive agent
for use after trials of SSRIs and benzodiazepines. It is
appropriate for use in patients who have either failed
trials of other treatments, or who should not receive
benzodiazepines because of a history of substance
abuse problems. Buspirone, in common with antidepressants, requires a two to three week period before
there is clinical evidence of improvement, and must be
continuously dosed to maintain its effects.
Benzodiazepines are controlled drugs under federal law. The number of U.S. drug-abuse related trips
to emergency departments involving benzodiazepine
medications exceeded 100,000 in 2002. Buspirone is
not a controlled substance and has no established
abuse potential.
Recommended dosage
Benzodiazepines should be administered 30 to 60
minutes before exposure to the anticipated stress.
Dosage should be individualized to minimize sedation.
The normal dose of alprazolam is 0.25–0.5 mg. The
usual dose of lorazepam is 2–3 mg. Doses may be
repeated if necessary.
Buspirone is initially dosed at 5 mg three times a
day. Patients should increase the dosage 5 mg/day, at
intervals of two to three days, as needed and should
not exceed 60 mg/day. Two to three weeks may be
required before a satisfactory response is seen.
Precautions
Benzodiazepines should not be used in patients with
psychosis, acute narrow angle glaucoma, or liver disease.
The drugs can act as respiratory depressants and should
be avoided in patients with respiratory conditions.
Benzodiazepines are potentially addictive and should
not be administered to patients with substance abuse
disorders. Because benzodiazepines are sedative, they
should be avoided in patients who must remain alert.
Their use for periods over four months has not been
documented. These drugs should not be used during the
second and third trimester of pregnancy, although use
during the first trimester appears to be safe. They should
not be taken while breastfeeding. Physicians and
pharmacists should be consulted about use in children.
Buspirone is metabolized by the liver and excreted
by the kidney, and should be used with care in patients
with hepatic or renal disease. The drug is classified as
schedule B during pregnancy, but should not be taken
during breastfeeding. Its use in children under the age
of 18 years has not been studied.
In 2004, the FDA cautioned revealed that certain
SSRIs could lead to increased risk of suicide in children and adolescents who took them for depression.
Parents should check with physicians to receive more
information on SSRIs when they are prescribed for
teens and children with anxiety.
Side effects
The most common side effects of benzodiazepines
are secondary to their CNS effects and include
sedation and sleepiness; depression; lethargy; apathy;
fatigue; hypoactivity; lightheadedness; memory impairment; disorientation; anterograde amnesia; restlessness;
confusion; crying or sobbing; delirium; headache; slurred speech; aphonia; dysarthria; stupor; seizures; coma;
syncope; rigidity; tremor; dystonia; vertigo; dizziness;
euphoria; nervousness; irritability; difficulty in concentration; agitation; inability to perform complex mental
functions; akathisia; hemiparesis; hypotonia; unsteadiness; ataxia; incoordination; weakness; vivid dreams;
psychomotor retardation; ‘‘glassy-eyed’’ appearance;
extrapyramidal symptoms; paradoxical reactions.
Other reactions include changes in heart rate and blood
pressure, changes in bowel function, severe skin rash and
changes in genitourinary function. Other adverse
effects have been reported.
Buspirone has a low incidence of side effects.
Dizziness and drowsiness are the most commonly
reported adverse effects. Other CNS effects include
dream disturbances; depersonalization, dysphoria,
noise intolerance, euphoria, akathisia, fearfulness,
loss of interest, disassociative reaction, hallucinations,
suicidal ideation, seizures; feelings of claustrophobia,
cold intolerance, stupor and slurred speech, psychosis.
Rarely, heart problems, including congestive heart
failure and myocardial infarction, have been reported.
Other adverse effects have been reported.
Interactions
The metabolism of alprazolam may be increased
by: cimetidine, oral contraceptives, disulfiram, fluoxetine, isoniazid, ketoconazole, metoprolol, propoxyphene, propranolol and valproic acid. The absorption
of all benzodiazepines is inhibited by concomitant use
of antacids. Benzodiazepines may increase blood
levels of digoxin, and reduce the efficacy of levodopa.
Other drug interactions have been reported.
Buspirone levels will be increased by concomitant
use of erythromycin, itraconazole, and nefazadone.
Doses should be adjusted based on clinical response.
Use of buspirone at the same time as mono-amine
oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs, phenelzine, tranycypromine) may cause severe blood pressure elevations.
Use of buspirone with MAOIs should be avoided.