Definition
Antiprotozoal drugs are medicines that treat
infections caused by protozoa.
Purpose
Antiprotozoal drugs are used to treat a variety of
diseases caused by protozoa. Protozoa are animallike, one-celled animals, such as amoebas. Some are
parasites that cause infections in the body. African
sleeping sickness, giardiasis, amebiasis, Pneumocystis
carinii pneumonia (PCP), and malaria are examples of
diseases caused by protozoa.
Description
Antiprotozoal drugs come in liquid, tablet, and
injectable forms and are available only with a doctor’s
prescription. Some commonly used antiprotozoal
drugs are metronidazole (Flagyl), eflornithine
(Ornidyl), furazolidone (Furoxone), hydroxychloroquine (Plaquenil), iodoquinol (Diquinol, Yodoquinol,
Yodoxin), and pentamidine (Pentam 300).
Recommended dosage
The recommended dosage depends on the type of
antiprotozoal drug, its strength, and the medical problem for which it is being used. Check with the physician who prescribed the drug or the pharmacist who
filled the prescription for the correct dosage. Always
take antiprotozoal drugs exactly as directed.
Precautions
Some people feel dizzy, confused, lightheaded, or
less alert when using these drugs. The drugs may also
cause blurred vision and other vision problems. For
these reasons, anyone who takes these drugs should
not drive, use machines or do anything else that might
be dangerous until they have found out how the drugs
affect them.
The antiprotozoal drug furazolidone may cause
very dangerous side effects when taken with certain
foods or beverages. Likewise, metronidazole (Flagyl)
can cause serious liver damage if taken with alcohol.
Check with the physician who prescribed the drug or
the pharmacist who filled the prescription for a list of
products to avoid while taking these medicines.
Anyone who has ever had unusual reactions to
antiprotozoal drugs or related medicines should let his
or her physician know before taking the drugs again.
The physician should also be told about any allergies
to foods, dyes, preservatives, or other substances.
Some antiprotozoal drugs may cause problems with
the blood. This can increase the risk of infection or
excessive bleeding. Patients taking these drugs shouldbe
careful not to injure their gums when brushing or flossing their teeth or using a toothpick. They shouldcheck
with the physician before having any dentalwork done.
Care should also be taken to avoidcuts from razors, nail
clippers, or kitchen knives, orhousehold tools. Anyone
who has any of these symptoms while taking antiprotozoal drugs should call the physician immediately:
 Fever or chills
 Signs of cold or flu
 Signs of infection, such as redness, swelling, or
inflammation
 Unusual bruising or bleeding
 Black, tarry stools
 Blood in urine or stools
 Pinpoint red spots on the skin
 Unusual tiredness or weakness.
Anyone taking this medicine should also check with
a physician immediately if any of these symptoms occur:
 Blurred vision or other vision changes
 Skin rash, hives, or itching
 Swelling of the neck
 Clumsiness or unsteadiness
 Numbness, tingling, pain, or weakness in the hands
or feet
 Decrease in urination.
Children are especially sensitive to the effects of
some antiprotozoal drugs. Never give this medicine to a
child unless directed to do so by a physician, and always
keep this medicine out of the reach of children. Use
safety vials.
The effects of antiprotozoal drugs on pregnant
women have not been studied. However, in experiments with pregnant laboratory animals, some antiprotozoal drugs cause birth defects or death of the
fetus. Women who are pregnant or who plan to
become pregnant should check with their physicians
before taking antiprotozoal drugs. Mothers who are
breastfeeding should also check with their physicians
about the safety of taking these drugs.
Before using antiprotozoal drugs, people with any
of these medical problems should make sure their
physicians are aware of their conditions:
 Anemia or other blood problems
 Kidney disease
 Heart disease
 Low blood pressure
 Diabetes
 Hypoglycemia (low blood sugar)
 Liver disease
 Stomach or intestinal disease
 Nerve or brain disease or disorder, including convulsions (seizures)
 Psoriasis (a skin condition)
 Hearing loss
 Deficiency of the enzyme glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD)
 Eye or vision problems
 Thyroid disease.
Side effects
The most common side effects are diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, and stomach pain. These problems
usually go away as the body adjusts to the drug and
do not require medical treatment.
Other rare side effects may occur. Anyone who
has unusual symptoms after taking an antiprotozoal drug should get in touch with his or her
physician.
Interactions
Antiprotozoal drugs may interact with other medicines. When this happens, the effects of one or both of
the drugs may change or the risk of side effects may be
greater. Anyone who takes antiprotozoal drugs should
let the physician know all other medicines he or she is
taking. Among the drugs that may interact with antiprotozoal drugs are:
 Alcohol
 Anticancer drugs
 Medicine for overactive thyroid
 Antiviral drugs such as zidovudine (Retrovir)
 Antibiotics
 Medicine used to relieve pain or inflammation
 Amphetamine
 Diet pills (appetite suppressants)
 Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAO inhibitors)
such as phenelzine (Nardil) and tranylcypromine
(Parnate), used to treat conditions including depression and Parkinson’s disease.
 Tricyclic antidepressants such as amitriptyline
(Elavil) and imipramine (Tofranil)
 Decongestants such as phenylephrine (NeoSynephrine) and pseudoephedrine (Sudafed)
 Other antiprotozoal drugs.
The list above does not include every medicine
that may interact with an antifungal drug. Be sure
to check with a physician or pharmacist before
combining antifungal drugs with any other prescription or nonprescription (over-the-counter)
medicine.