Definition
Antinausea drugs are medicines that control nausea—a feeling of sickness or queasiness in the stomach
with an urge to vomit. These drugs also prevent or stop
vomiting. Drugs that control vomiting are called antiemetic drugs.
Purpose
Antinausea drugs such as prochlorperazine
(Compazine), usually control both nausea and vomiting. Prochlorperazine is also sometimes prescribed for
symptoms of mental disorders, such as schizophrenia.
Another commonly prescribed antinausea drug is
promethazine (Phenergan). Promethazine also may be
prescribed to relieve allergy symptoms and apprehension, as well as motion sickness.
Description
Prochlorperazine is available only with a physician’s prescription. It is sold in syrup, capsule, tablet,
injection, and suppository forms.
Recommended dosage
To control nausea and vomiting in adults, the
usual dose is:
 Tablets—one 5-mg or 10-mg tablet three to four
times a day
 Extended-release capsules—one 15-mg capsule first
thing in the morning or one 10-mg capsule every
12 hours
 Suppository—25 mg, twice a day
 Syrup—5-10 mg three to four times a day
 Injection—5-10 mg injected into a muscle three to
four times a day.
Doses for children must be determined by a
physician.
Promethazine may be administered in pill, syrup,
chewable tablet, or extended release capsule form by
prescription only. For severe nausea, it may be administered by injection or via a suppository. The physician
recommends dose depending on the patient’s condition.
Precautions
Prochlorperazine may cause a movement disorder
called tardive dyskinesia. Signs of this disorder are
involuntary twitches and muscle spasms in the face
and body and jutting or rolling movements of the
tongue. The condition may be permanent. Older people,
especially women, are particularly at risk of developing
this problem when they take prochlorperazine.
Some people feel drowsy, dizzy, lightheaded, or less
alert when using this medicine. The drug may also cause
blurred vision, and movement problems. For these reasons, anyone who takes this drug should not drive, use
machines or do anything else that might be dangerous
until they have found out how the drug affects them.
Prochlorperazine makes some people sweat less,
which can allow the body to overheat. The drug may
also make the skin and eyes more sensitive to the sun.
People who are taking prochlorperazine should try to
avoid extreme heat and exposure to the sun. When
going outdoors, they should wear protective clothing,
a hat, a sunscreen with a skin protection factor (SPF)
of at least 15, and sunglasses that block ultraviolet
(UV) light. Saunas, sunlamps, tanning booths, tanning beds, hot baths, and hot tubs should be avoided
while taking this medicine. Anyone who must be
exposed to extreme heat while taking the drug should
check with his or her physician.
This medicine adds to the effects of alcohol and
other drugs that slow down the central nervous system, such as antihistamines, cold and flu medicines,
tranquilizers, sleep aids, anesthetics, some pain medicines, and muscle relaxants. Drinking alcohol while
taking prochlorperazine is not advised and patients
should check with the physician who prescribed the
drug before combining it with any other medicines.
Do not stop taking this medicine without checking
with the physician who prescribed it. Stopping the drug
suddenly can cause dizziness, nausea, vomiting,tremors,
and other side effects. When stopping the medicine, it
may be necessary to taper down the dose gradually.
Prochlorperazine may cause false pregnancy tests.
Women who are pregnant (or planning to become
pregnant) or breast feeding should check with their
physicians before using antinausea medicines.
Before using prochlorperazine, people with any of
the medical problems should make sure their physicians are aware of their conditions:
 Previous sensitivity or allergic reaction to
prochlorperazine
 Heart disease
 Glaucoma
 Brain tumor
 Intestinal blockage
 Abnormal blood conditions, such as leukemia
 Exposure to pesticides.
Some people may experience side effects from
promethazine including:
 dry mouth
 drowsiness
 confusion
 fatigue
 difficulty coordinating movements
 stuffy nose.
A physician should be contacted immediately if a
patient experiences the following effects while taking
promethazine:
 vision problems
 ringing in the ears
 tremors
 insomnia
 excitement
 restlessness
 yellowing of the skin or eyes
 skin rash.
Side effects
Many side effects are possible with prochlorperazine, including, but not limited to, constipation, dizziness, drowsiness, decreased sweating, dry mouth, stuffy
nose, movement problems, changes inmenstrual period,
increased sensitivity to sun, and swelling or pain in
breasts. Anyone who has unusual or troublesome symptoms after taking prochlorperazine should get in touch
with his or her physician.
Side effects associated with promethazine include
those listed above and interactions with various medications that may cause complications or lessen the
effects of the drug. A physician should be notified of
other medications the patient is on when taking
promethazine.
Interactions
Prochlorperazine may interact with other medicines. When this happens, the effects of one or both of
the drugs may change or the risk of side effects may be
greater. Among the drugs that may interact with prochlorperazine are antiseizure drugs such as phenytoin
(Dilantin) and carbamazepine (Tegretol), anticoagulants such as warfarin (Coumadin), and drugs that
slow the central nervous system such as alprazolam
(Xanax), diazepam (Valium), and secobarbital
(Seconal). Not every drug that interacts with prochlorperazine is listed here. A physician or pharmacist can
advise patients about prescription or nonprescription (over-the-counter) drugs that might interact with
Prochlorperazine.