Definition
Topical antibiotics are medicines applied to the
skin to kill bacteria.
Purpose
Topical antibiotics help prevent infections caused
by bacteria that get into minor cuts, scrapes, and
burns. Treating minor wounds with antibiotics allows
quicker healing. If the wounds are left untreated, the
bacteria will multiply, causing pain, redness, swelling,
itching, and oozing. Untreated infections can eventually spread and become much more serious.
Different kinds of topical antibiotics kill different
kinds of bacteria. Many antibiotic first-aid products
contain combinations of antibiotics to make them
effective against a broad range of bacteria.
When treating a wound, it is not enough to simply
apply a topical antibiotic. The wound must first be
cleaned with soap and water and patted dry. After the
antibiotic is applied, the wound should be covered
with a dressing, such as a bandage or a protective gel
or spray. For many years, it was thought that wounds
heal best when exposed to the air. But now most
experts say it is best to keep wounds clean and moist
while they heal. The covering should still allow some
air to reach the wound, however.
Description
Some topical antibiotics are available without a
prescription and are sold in many forms, including
creams, ointments, powders, and sprays. Some widely
used topical antibiotics are bacitracin, neomycin,
mupirocin, and polymyxin B. Among the products
that contain one or more of these ingredients are
Bactroban (a prescription item), Neosporin,
Polysporin, and Triple Antibiotic Ointment or Cream.
Recommended dosage
The recommended dosage depends on the type of
topical antibiotic. Follow the directions on the package label or ask a pharmacist for directions.
In general, topical antibiotics should be applied
within four hours after injury. Do not use more than
the recommended amount and do not apply it more
often than three times a day. Do not apply the medicine over large areas of skin or on open wounds.
Precautions
Many public health experts are concerned about
antibiotic resistance, a problem that can develop when
antibiotics are overused. Over time, bacteria develop
new defenses against antibiotics that once were effective
against them. Because bacteria reproduce so quickly,
these defenses can be rapidly passed on through generations of bacteria until almost all are immune to the
effects of a particular antibiotic. The process happens
faster than new antibiotics can be developed. To help
control the problem, many experts advise people to use
topical antibiotics only for short periods, that is, until
the wound heals, and only as directed. For the topical
antibiotic to work best, it should be used only to prevent infection in a fresh wound, not to treat an infection
that has already started. Wounds that are not fresh may
need the attention of a physician to prevent complications such as blood poisoning.
Topical antibiotics are meant to be used only on
the skin and only for only a few days at a time. If the
wound has not healed in five days, stop using the
antibiotic and call a doctor.
Do not use topical antibiotics on large areas of skin
or on open wounds. These products should not be used
to treat diaper rash in infants or incontinence rash in
adults.
Only minor cuts, scrapes, and burns should be
treated with topical antibiotics. Certain kinds of injuries may need medical care and should not be selftreated with topical antibiotics. These include:

large wounds

deep cuts

cuts that continue bleeding

cuts that may need stitches

burns any larger than a few inches in diameter

scrapes imbedded with particles that won’t wash
away

animal bites

deep puncture wounds

eye injuries
Never use regular topical antibiotics in the eyes.
Special antibiotic products are available for treating
eye infections.
Although topical antibiotics control infections
caused by bacteria, they may allow fungal infections
to develop. The use of other medicines to treat the
fungal infections may be necessary. Check with the
physician or pharmacist.
Some people may be allergic to one or more ingredients in a topical antibiotic product. If an allergic
reaction develops, stop using the product immediately
and call a physician.
No harmful or abnormal effects have been
reported in babies whose mothers used topical antibiotics while pregnant or nursing. However, pregnant
women generally are advised not to use any drugs
during the first 3 months after conception. A woman
who is pregnant or breastfeeding or who plans to
become pregnant should check with her physician
before using a topical antibiotic.
Unless a physician says to do so, do not use topical antibiotics on children under two years of age.
Side effects
The most common minor side effects are itching
or burning. These problems usually do not require
medical treatment unless they do not go away or they
interfere with normal activities.
If any of the following side effects occur, check
with a doctor as soon as possible:

rash

swelling of the lips and face

sweating

tightness or discomfort in the chest

breathing problems

fainting or dizziness

low blood pressure

nausea

diarrhea

hearing loss or ringing in the ears
Other rare side effects may occur. Anyone who
has unusual symptoms after using a topical antibiotic should get in touch with the physician who prescribed or the pharmacist who recommedned the
medication.
Interactions
Using certain topical antibiotics at the same time
as hydrocortisone (a topical corticosteroid used to
treat inflammation) may hide signs of infection or
allergic reaction. Do not use these two medicines at
the same time unless told to do so by a health care
provider.
Anyone who is using any other type of prescription or nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicine
on the skin should check with a doctor before using a
topical antibiotic.