Definition
The atypical antipsychotic agents, sometimes
called the ‘‘novel’’ antipsychotic agents are a group
of drugs which are different chemically from the older
drugs used to treat psychosis. The ‘‘conventional’’
antipsychotic drugs are classified by their chemical
structures as the phenothiazines, thioxanthines
(which are chemically very similar to the phenothiazines), butyrophenones, diphenylbutylpiperadines
and the indolones. All of the atypical antipsychotic
agents are chemically classified as dibenzepines. They
are considered atypical or novel because they have
different side effects from the conventional antipsychotic agents. The atypical drugs are far less likely to
cause extra-pyrammidal side-effects(EPS), drug
induced involuntary movements, than are the older
drugs. The atypical antipsychotic drugs may also be
effective in some cases that are resistant to older drugs.
The drugs in this group are clozapine (Clozaril),
loxapine (Loxitane), olanzapine (Zyprexa), and quetiapine (Seroquel).
Purpose
The antipsychotic drugs are used to treat severe
emotional disorders. Although there may be different
names for these disorders, depending on severity and
how long the symptoms last, psychotic disorders all
cause at least one of the following symptoms:
Loxapine has also been used to treat anxiety with
mental depression.
Recommended dosage
The recommended dose depends on the drug, the
patient, and the condition being treated. The normal
practice is to start each patient at a low dose, and
gradually increase the dose until a satisfactory
response is achieved. The odse should be held at the
lowest level that gives satisfactory results.
Clozapine usually requires doses between 300 and
600 milligrams a day, but some people require as much
as 900 milligrams/day. Doses higher than 900 millgrams/day are not recommended.
Loxapine is usually effective at doses of 60-100
milligrams/day, but may be used in doses as high as
250 mg/day if needed.
Olanzapine doses vary with the condition being
treated. The usual maximum dose is 20 milligrams/day.
Quetiapine may be dosed anywhere from 150-750
milligrams/day, depending on how well the patient
responds.
Precautions
Although the atypical antipsychotics are generally
safe, clozapine has been associated with severe agranulocytosis, a shortage of white blood cells. For this
reason, people who may be treated with clozapine
should have blood counts before starting the drug,
blood counts every week for as long as they are using
clozapine, and blood counts every week for the first
4 weeks after they stop taking clozapine. If there is any
evidence of a drop in the white blood count while using
clozapine, the drug should be stopped.
Atypical antipsychotics should not be used in
patients with liver damage, brain or circulatory problems, or some types of blood problems.
Allergies
People who have had an allergic reaction to one of
the atypical antipsychotics should not use that
medication again. However, sometimes it is possible to
use a different drug from the same group safely.
Pregnancy
The atypical antipsychotics have not been proved
safe in pregnancy. They should be used only when
clearly needed and when potential benefits outweigh
potential hazards to the fetus. These drugs have not
been reported in human milk.
Side effects
Although the atypical antipsychotics are less
likely to cause involuntary movements than the older
antipsychotic drugs, they still have a large number of
adverse effects. The following list is not complete.
Review each drug individually for a full list of possible
adverse effects.
Interactions
Taking atypical antipsychotic medications with
certain other drugs may affect the way the drugs work
or may increase the chance of side effects. While taking
antipsychotic drugs, do not take any other prescription
or nonprescription (over-the-counter) drugs without
first checking with a physician.
Because the atypical antipsychotics may cause
lowering of blood pressure, care should be used when
these drugs are taken at the same time as other drugs
which lower blood pressure.
Quetiapine has many interactions. Doses should
be carefully adjusted when quetiapine is used with
ketoconazole, itraconazole, fluconazole, erythromycin, carbamazepine, barbiturates, rifampin or glucocorticoids including prednisone, dexamethasone and
methylprednisolone.
These drugs will also require dose adjustments
when used with anti-Parkinson medications.