Definition
These drugs are used to treat gastroesophageal
reflux, the backward flow of stomach contents into
the esophagus.
Purpose
The drug discussed here, cisapride (Propulsid), is
used to treat nighttime heartburn resulting from gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). In this condition, food and stomach juices flow backward from the
stomach into the esophagus, the part of the digestive
tract through which food passes on its way from the
mouth to the stomach. Normally, a muscular ring
called the lower esophageal sphincter (LES) opens to
allow food into the stomach and then closes to prevent
the stomach’s contents from flowing back into the
esophagus. In people with GERD, this muscular ring
is either weak or it relaxes at the wrong times. The
main symptom is heartburn – a burning sensation
centered behind the breastbone and spreading upward
toward the neck and throat.
Cisapride works by strengthening the lower esophageal sphincter and making the stomach empty
more quickly. This shortens the amount of time that the
esophagus comes in contact with the stomach contents.
Other drugs, such as H2-blockers are sometimes prescribed to reduce the amount of acid in the stomach.
Description
Cisapride is available only with a physician’s prescription. Cisapride is sold in tablet and liquid forms.
Recommended dosage
The dose depends on the patient. The average
dose for adults and children age 12 and over is 5-20 mg
taken two to four times a day. The medicine should be
taken 15 minutes before meals and at bedtime. For
children under 12, the dose is based on body weight
and should be determined by the child’s physician.
Precautions
This medicine is effective in treating only nighttime heartburn, not daytime heartburn.
Cisapride may increase the effects of alcohol and
tranquilizers.
Cisapride has caused dangerous irregular heartbeats in a few people who took it with other medicines.
Anyone who takes this drug should let the physician
know all other medicines he or she is taking. Patients
with heart problems should check with their physicians before taking cisapride.
Anyone who has bleeding, blockage, or leakage in
the stomach or intestines should not take cisapride.
Cisapride should not be used by anyone who has had
an unusual reaction to the drug in the past. In addition, people with any of the following medical problems should make sure their physicians are aware of
their conditions:

Epilepsy or history of seizures

Kidney disease

Liver disease.
The effects of taking cisapride during pregnancy
have not been fully studied. Women who are pregnant or plan to become pregnant should check with
their physicians before taking Cisapride. The drug
passes into breast milk and may affect nursing
babies. Women who are breastfeeding and need to
take this medicine should check with their physicians. Avoiding breastfeeding while taking the drug
may be necessary.
Side effects
The most common side effects are abdominal
pain, bloating, gas, diarrhea, constipation, nausea,
upper respiratory infections, inflammation of the
nasal passages and sinuses, headache, and viral
infections. Other side effects may occur. Anyone
who has unusual or troublesome symptoms after
taking this drug should get in touch with his or her
physician.
Interactions
Cisapride may interact with a variety of other
medicines. When this happens, the effects of one or
both of the drugs may change or the risk of side effects
may be greater. Anyone who takes Cisapride should
let the physician know all other medicines he or she is
taking. Among the drugs that may interact with cisapride are:

Antifungal drugs such as ketoconazole (Nizoral),
miconazole (Monistat), and fluconazole (Diflucan)

Antibiotics such as clarithromycin (Biaxin) and erythromycin (E-Mycin, ERYC)

Blood-thinners such as warfarin (Coumadin)

H2-blockers such as cimetidine (Tagamet) and ranitidine (Zantac)

Tranquilizers such as chlordiazepoxide (Librium),
diazepam (Valium), and alprazolam (Xanax).
The list above does not include every drug that
may interact with cisapride. Be sure to check with a
physician or pharmacist before combining cisapride
with any other prescription or nonprescription (overthe-counter) medicine.