Definition
Anti-itch drugs are medicines taken by mouth or
by injection to relieve itching.
Purpose
The medicine described here, hydroxyzine, is a
type of antihistamine used to relieve itching caused
by allergic reactions. An allergic reaction occurs
when the body is unusually sensitive to some substance, such as pollen, dust, mold, or certain foods or
medicine. The body reacts by releasing a chemical
called histamine that causes itching and other symptoms, such as sneezing and watery eyes. Antihistamines
reduce the symptoms by blocking the effects of
histamine.
Hydroxyzine is also prescribed for anxiety and to
help people relax before or after having general
anesthesia.
Description
Anti-itch drugs, also called antipruritic drugs, are
available only with a physician’s prescription and
come in tablet and injectable forms. Some commonly
used brands of the anti-itch drug hydroxyzine are
Atarax and Vistaril.
Recommended dosage
When prescribed for itching, the usual dosage for
adults is 25 mg, three to four times a day. For children
over six years of age, the usual dosage 50-100 mg per
day, divided into several small doses. The usual dosage
for children under six years of age is 50 mg per day,
divided into several small doses.
The dosage may be different for different people.
Check with the physician who prescribed the drug
or the pharmacist who filled the prescription for the
correct dosage, and take the medicine exactly as
directed.
Precautions
This medicine should not be used for more than
four months at a time because its effects can wear off.
See a physician regularly while taking the medicine to
determine whether it is still needed.
Hydroxyzine may add to the effects of alcohol and
other drugs that slow down the central nervous system, such as other antihistamines, cold medicine,
allergy medicine, sleep aids, medicine for seizures,
tranquilizers, some pain relievers, and muscle relaxants. Anyone taking hydroxyzine should not drink
alcohol and should check with his or her physician
before taking any of the above.
Some people feel drowsy or less alert when using
this medicine. Anyone who takes it should not drive,
use machines, or do anything else that might be
dangerous until they have found out how the drugs
affect them.
Anyone who has had unusual reactions to hydroxyzine in the past should let his or her physician know
before taking the medicine again. The physician
should also be told about any allergies to foods,
dyes, preservatives, or other substances.
A woman who is pregnant or who may become
pregnant should check with her physician before taking this medicine. In studies of laboratory animals,
hydroxyzine has caused birth defects when taken during pregnancy. Although the drug’s effects on pregnant women have not been fully studied, physicians
advise against taking it in early pregnancy.
 BREASTFEEDING. Women who are breastfeeding
should also check with their physicians before using
hydroxyzine. The medicine may pass into breast milk
and may cause problems in nursing babies whose
mothers take it.
Side effects
The most common side effect, drowsiness, usually
goes away as the body adjusts to the drug. If it does
not, reducing the dosage may be necessary. Other side
effects, such as dry mouth, also may occur and do not
need medical attention unless they continue.
More serious side effects are not common, but
may occur. If any of the following side effects occur,
check with the physician who prescribed the medicine
as soon as possible:

Twitches or tremors

Convulsions (seizures).
Interactions
Hydroxyzine may interact with other medicines.
When this happens, the effects of one or both of the
drugs may change or the risk of side effects may be
greater. Anyone who takes hydroxyzine should let the
physician know all other medicines he or she is taking.
Among the drugs that may interact with hydroxyzine are:

Barbiturates such as phenobarbital and secobarbital
(Seconal)

Opioid (narcotic) pain medicines such as meperidine
(Demerol) and oxycodone (Percocet)

Non-narcotic pain medicines such as acetaminophen
(Tylenol) and ibuprofen (Motrin, Advil).
The list above may not include every drug that
interacts with hydroxyzine. Be sure to check with a
physician or pharmacist before combining hydroxyzine with any other prescription or nonprescription
(over-the-counter) medicine.