Definition
Antiviral drugs are medicines that cure or control
virus infections.
Purpose
Antivirals are used to treat infections caused by
viruses. Unlike antibacterial drugs, which may cover a
wide range of pathogens, antiviral agents tend to be
narrow in spectrum, and have limited efficacy.
Description
Exclusive of the antiretroviral agents used in HIV
(AIDS) therapy, there are currently only 11 antiviral
drugs available, covering four types of virus. Acyclovir
(Zovirax), famciclovir (Famvir), and valacyclovir
(Valtrex) are effective against herpesvirus, including
herpes zoster and herpes genitalis. They may also be of
value in either conditions caused by herpes, such as
chickenpox and shingles. These drugs are not curative,
but may reduce the pain of a herpes outbreak and
shorten the period of viral shedding.
Amantadine (Symmetrel), oseltamivir (Tamiflu),
rimantidine (Flumadine), and zanamivir (Relenza) are
useful in treatment of influenza virus. Amantadine,
rimantadine, and oseltamivir may be administered
throughout the flu season as preventatives for patients
who cannot take influenza virus vaccine.
Cidofovir (Vistide), foscarnet (Foscavir), and
ganciclovir (Cytovene) have been beneficial in treatment of cytomegalovirus in immunosupressed
patients, primarily HIV-positive patients and transplant recipients. Ribavirin (Virazole) is used to treat
respiratory syncytial virus. In combination with
interferons, ribavirin has shown some efficacy
against hepatitis C, and there have been anecdotal
reports of utility against other types of viral
infections.
As a class, the antivirals are not curative, and
must be used either prophylactically or early in the
development of an infection. Their mechanism of
action is typically to inactivate the enzymes needed
for viral replication. This will reduce the rate of viral
growth, but will not inactive the virus already present.
Antiviral therapy must normally be initiated within 48
hours of the onset of an infection to provide any
benefit. Drugs used for influenza may be used
throughout the influenza season in high risk patients,
or within 48 hours of exposure to a known carrier.
Antiherpetic agents should be used at the first signs of
an outbreak. Anti-cytomegaloviral drugs must routinely be used as part of a program of secondary prophylaxis (maintenance therapy following an initial
response) in order to prevent reinfection in immunocompromised patients.
Recommended dosage
Dosage varies with the drug, patient age and condition, route of administration, and other factors. See
specific references.
Precautions
Ganciclovir is available in intravenous injection,
oral capsules, and intraoccular inserts. The capsules
should be reserved for prophylactic use in organ transplant patients, or for HIV infected patients who cannot be treated with the intravenous drug. The toxicity
profile of this drug when administered systemically
includes granulocytopenia, anemia and thrombocytopenia. The drug is in pregnancy category C, but has
caused significant fetal abnormalities in animal studies
including cleft palate and organ defects. Breast feeding
is not recommended.
Cidofovir causes renal toxicity in 53% of patients.
Patients should be well hydrated, and renal function
should be checked regularly. Other common adverse
effects are nausea and vomiting in 65% or patients,
asthenia in 46% and headache and diarrhea, both
reported in 27% of cases. The drug is category C in
pregnancy, due to fetal abnormalities in animal
studies. Breast feeding is not recommended.
Foscarnet is used in treatment of immunocompromised patients with cytomegalovirus infections
and in acyclovir-resistant herpes simples virus. The
primary hazard is renal toxicity. Alterations in electrolyte levels may cause seizures. Foscarnet is category C during pregnancy. The drug has caused
skeletal abnormailities in developing fetuses. It is
not known whether foscarnet is excreted in breast
milk, however the drug does appear in breast milk in
animal studies.
Valaciclovir is metabolized to acyclovir, so that
the hazards of the two drugs are very similar. They
are generally well tolerated, but nausea and headache
are common adverse effects. They are both pregnancy category B. Although there have been no
reports of fetal abnormalities attributable to either
drug, the small number of reported cases makes it
impossible to draw conclusions regarding safety in
pregnancy. Acyclovir is found in breast milk, but
no adverse effects have been reported in the newborn. Famciclovir is similar in actions and adverse
effects.
Ribavirin is used by aerosol for treatment of hospitalized infants and young children with severe lower
respiratory tract infections due to respiratory syncytial
virus (RSV). When administered orally, the drug has
been used in adultys to treat other viral diseases
including acute and chronic hepatitis, herpes genitalis,
measles, and Lassa fever, however there is relatively
little information about these uses. In rare cases, initiation of ribavirin therapy has led to deterioration of
respiratory function in infants. Careful monitoring is
essential for safe use.
The anti-influenza drugs are generally well tolerated. Amantadine, which is also used for treatment
of Parkinsonism, may show more frequent CNS
effects, including sedation and dizziness. Rapid discontinuation of amantidine may cause an increase in
Parkinsonian symptoms in patients using the drug
for that purpose. All are schedule C for pregnancy.
In animal studies, they have caused fetal malformations in doses several times higher than the normal
human dose. Use caution in breast feeding.
Interactions
Consult specific references for information on
drug interactions.
Use particular caution in HIV-positive patients,
since these patients are commonly on multi-drug regimens with a high frequency of interactions.
Ganciclovir should not be used with other drugs
which cause hematologic toxicity, and cidofovir
should not be used with other drugs that may cause
kidney damage.