Definition
Anticancer, or antineoplastic, drugs are used to
treat malignancies, or cancerous growths. Drug
therapy may be used alone, or in combination with
other treatments such as surgery or radiation therapy.
Purpose
Anticancer drugs are used to control the growth of
cancerous cells. Cancer is commonly defined as the
uncontrolled growth of cells, with loss of differentiation and commonly, with metastasis, spread of the
cancer to other tissues and organs. Cancers are malignant growths. In contrast, benign growths remain
encapsulated and grow within a well-defined area.
Although benign tumors may be fatal if untreated,
due to pressure on essential organs, as in the case of a
benign brain tumor, surgery or radiation are the preferred methods of treating growths which have a well
defined location. Drug therapy is used when the tumor
has spread, or may spread, to all areas of the body.
Description
Several classes of drugs may be used in cancer
treatment, depending on the nature of the organ
involved. For example, breast cancers are commonly
stimulated by estrogens, and may be treated with
drugs that inactivate the sex hormones. Similarly,
prostate cancer may be treated with drugs that inactivate androgens, the male sex hormone. However, the
majority of antineoplastic drugs act by interfering
with cell growth. Since cancerous cells grow more
rapidly than other cells, the drugs target those cells
that are in the process of reproducing themselves. As a
result, antineoplastic drugs will commonly affect not
only the cancerous cells, but others cells that commonly reproduce quickly, including hair follicles,
ovaries and testes, and the blood-forming organs.
Newer methods of antineoplastic drug therapy
have taken different approaches, including angiogenesis—the inhibition of formation of blood vessels feeding the tumor and contributing to tumor growth.
Although these approaches hold promise, they are
not yet in common use. Developing new anticancer
drugs is the work of ongoing research. In 2003, a new
technique was developed to streamline the search for
effective drugs. Researchers pumped more than 23,000
chemical compounds through a screening technique to
identify those that help fight cancer while leaving
healthy cells unharmed. The system identified nine
compounds matching the profile, including one previously unidentified drug for fighting cancer. They
have expanded their research to determine how the
drug might be developed. This was an important step
in identifying anticancer dugs that are not completely
toxic to healthy cells.
Antineoplastic drugs may be divided into two
classes: cycle specific and non-cycle specific. Cycle
specific drugs act only at specific points of the cell’s
duplication cycle, such as anaphase or metaphase,
while non-cycle specific drugs may act at any point in
the cell cycle. In order to gain maximum effect, antineoplastic drugs are commonly used in combinations.
Precautions
Because antineoplastic agents do not target specific cell types, they have a number of common
adverse side effects. Hair loss is common due to the
effects on hair follicles, and anemia, immune system
impairment, and clotting problems are caused by
destruction of the blood-forming organs, leading to
a reduction in the number of red cells, white cells, and
platelets. Because of the frequency and severity of
these side effects, it is common to administer chemotherapy in cycles, allowing time for recovery from
the drug effects before administering the next dose.
Doses are often calculated, not on the basis of weight,
but rather based on blood counts, in order to avoid
dangerous levels of anemia (red cell depletion), neutropenia (white cell deficiency), or thrombocytopenia
(platelet deficiency.)
The health professional has many responsibilities
in dealing with patients undergoing chemotherapy.
The patient must be well informed of the risks and
benefits of chemotherapy, and must be emotionally
prepared for the side effects. These may be permanent,
and younger patients should be aware of the high risk
of sterility after chemotherapy.
The patient must also know which side effects
should be reported to the practitioner, since many
adverse effects do not appear until several days after
a dose of chemotherapy. When chemotherapy is selfadministered, the patient must be familiar with
proper use of the drugs, including dose scheduling
and avoidance of drug-drug and food-drug
interactions.
Appropriate steps should be taken to minimize
side effects. These may include administration of antinauseant medications to reduce nausea and vomiting,
maintaining fluid levels to reduce drug toxicity, particularly to the kidneys, or application of a scalp tourniquet to reduce blood flow to the scalp and minimize
hair loss due to drug therapy.
Patients receiving chemotherapy also are at risk of
infections due to reduced white blood counts. While
prophylactic antibiotics may be useful, the health care
professional should also be sure to use standard precautions, including gowns and gloves when appropriate. Patients should be alerted to avoid risks of viral
contamination, and live virus immunizations are contraindicated until the patient has fully recovered from
the effects of chemotherapy. Similarly, the patient
should avoid contact with other people who have
recently had live virus immunizations.
Other precautions which should be emphasized
are the risks to pregnant or nursing women. Because
antineoplastic drugs are commonly harmful to the
fetus, women of childbearing potential should be cautioned to use two effective methods of birth control
while receiving cancer chemotherapy. This also applies
if the woman’s male partner is receiving chemotherapy. Breastfeeding should be avoided while the mother
is being treated.
Before prescribing or administering anticancer
drugs, health care providers should inquire whether
the patient has any of the following conditions:

chickenpox or recent exposure to someone with
chickenpox

shingles (Herpes zoster)

mouth sores

current or past seizures

head injury

nerve or muscle disease

hearing problems

infection of any kind

gout

colitis

intestine blockage

stomach ulcer

kidney stones

kidney disease

liver disease

current or past alcohol abuse
immune system disease

cataracts or other eye problems

high cholesterol
Other precautions
The anticancer drug methotrexate has additional
precautions. Patients should be given advice on the
effects of sun exposure and the use of alcohol and pain
relievers.
Side effects
Tamoxifen
The anticancer drug tamoxifen (Nolvadex) increases
the risk of cancer of the uterus in some women. It also
causes cataracts and other eye problems. Women taking
this drug may have hot flashes, menstrual changes, genital itching, vaginal discharge, and weight gain. Men who
take tamoxifen may lose interest in sex or become impotent. Health care providers should keep in close contact
with patients to assess the individual risks associated
with taking this powerful drug.
Other anticancer drugs
These side effects are not common, but could be a
sign of a serious problem. Health care providers
should immediately be consulted if any of the following occur:

black, tarry, or bloody stools

blood in the urine

diarrhea

fever or chills

cough or hoarseness

wheezing or shortness of breath

sores in the mouth or on the lips

unusual bleeding or bruising

swelling of the face

red ‘‘pinpoint’’ spots on the skin

redness, pain, or swelling at the point where an injectable anticancer drug is given

pain in the side or lower back

problems urinating or painful urination

dizziness or faintness

fast or irregular heartbeat
Other side effects do not need immediate care, but
should have medical attention. They are:

joint pain

skin rash

hearing problems or ringing in the ears

numbness or tingling in the fingers or toes

trouble walking or balance problems

swelling of the feet or lower legs

unusual tiredness or weakness

loss of taste

seizures

dizziness

confusion

agitation

headache

dark urine

yellow eyes or skin

flushing of the face
In addition, there are other possible side effects
that do not need medical attention unless they persist
or interfere with normal activities. These include
changes in menstrual period, itchy skin, nausea and
vomiting, and loss of appetite.
Other rare side effects may occur. Anyone who has
unusual symptoms after taking anticancer drugs should
contact the physician who prescribed the medication.
Interactions
Anticancer drugs may interact with a number of
other medicines. When this happens, the effects of one
or both of the drugs may change or the risk of side effects
may be greater.The health care provider should be aware
of all other prescription or non-prescription (over-thecounter) medicines a patient is taking. The primary care
provider should also be toldif the patient has been treated
with radiation or has taken other anticancer drugs.