Definition
Antibiotic-associated colitis is an inflammation of
the intestines that sometimes occurs following antibiotic treatment and is caused by toxins produced by the
bacterium Clostridium difficile.
Description
Antibiotic-associated colitis, also called antibioticassociated enterocolitis, can occur following antibiotic
treatment. The bacteria Clostridia difficile are normally
found in the intestines of 5% of healthy adults, but
people can also pick up the bacteria while they are in a
hospital or nursing home. In a healthy person, harmless
resident intestinal bacteria compete with each other for
food and places to ‘‘sit’’ along the inner intestinal wall.
When antibiotics are given, most of the resident bacteria
are killed. With fewer bacteria to compete with, the
normally harmless Clostridia difficile grow rapidly and
produce toxins. These toxins damage the inner wall of
the intestines and cause inflammation and diarrhea.
Although all antibiotics can cause this disease, it is
most commonly caused by clindamycin (Cleocin), ampicillin (Omnipen), amoxicillin (Amoxil, Augmentin, or
Wymox), and any in the cephalosporin class (such as
cefazolin or cephalexin). Symptoms of the condition can
occur during antibiotic treatment or within four weeks
after the treatment has stopped.
In approximately half of cases of antibiotic-associated colitis, the condition progresses to a more severe
form of colitis called pseudomembranous enterocolitis
in which pseudomembranes are excreted in the stools.
Pseudomembranes are membrane-like collections of
white blood cells, mucus, and the protein that causes
blood to clot (fibrin) that are released by the damaged
intestinal wall.
Causes and symptoms
Antibiotic-associated colitis is caused by toxins
produced by the bacterium Clostridium difficile after
treatment with antibiotics. When most of the other
intestinal bacteria have been killed, Clostridium difficile grows rapidly and releases toxins that damage the
intestinal wall. The disease and symptoms are caused
by these toxins, not by the bacterium itself.
Symptoms of antibiotic-associated colitis usually
begin four to ten days after antibiotic treatment has
begun. The early signs and symptoms of this disease
include lower abdominal cramps, an increased need to
pass stool, and watery diarrhea. As the disease progresses, the patient may experience a general ill feeling,
fatigue, abdominal pain, and fever. If the disease proceeds to pseudomembranous enterocolitis, the patient
may also experience nausea, vomiting, large amounts
of watery diarrhea, and a very high fever (104-105 8F/
40-40.5 8C). Complications of antibiotic-associated
colitis include severe dehydration, imbalances in
blood minerals, low blood pressure, fluid accumulation in deep skin (edema), enlargement of the large
intestine (toxic megacolon), and the formation of a
tear (perforation) in the wall of the large intestine.
The Clostridium difficile toxin is found in the
stools of persons older than 60 years of age 20-100
times more frequently than in the stools of persons
who are 10-20 years old. As a result, the elderly are
much more prone to developing antibiotic-associated
colitis than younger individuals.
Diagnosis
Antibiotic-associated colitis can be diagnosed by
the symptoms and recent medical history of the
patient, by a laboratory test for the bacterial toxin,
and/or by using a procedure called endoscopy.
If the diarrhea and related symptoms occurred after
the patient received antibiotics, antibiotic-associated
colitis may be suspected. A stool sample may be analyzed
for the presence of the Clostridium difficile toxin. This
toxin test is the preferred diagnostic test for antibioticassociated colitis. One frequently used test for the toxin
involves adding the processed stool sample to a human
cell culture. If the toxin is present in the stool sample, the
cells die. It may take up to two days to get the results
from this test. A simpler test, which provides results in
two to three hours, is also available. Symptoms and toxin
test results are usually enough to diagnose the disease.
Another tool that may be useful in the diagnosis
of antibiotic-associated colitis, however, is a procedure called an endoscopy that involves inserting a
thin, lighted tube into the rectum to visually inspect
the intestinal lining. Two different types of endoscopy
procedures, the sigmoidoscopy and the colonoscopy,
are used to view different parts of the large intestine.
These procedures are performed in a hospital or doctor’s office. Patients are sedated during the procedure
to make them more comfortable and are allowed to go
home after recovering from the sedation.
Treatment
Diarrhea, regardless of the cause, is always treated
by encouraging the individual to replace lost fluids and
prevent dehydration. One method to treat antibioticassociated colitis is to simply stop taking the antibiotic
that caused the disease. This allows the normal intestinal bacteria to repopulate the intestines and inhibits
the overgrowth of Clostridium difficile. Many patients
with mild disease respond well to this and are free from
diarrhea within two weeks. It is important, however, to
make sure that the original disease for which the antibiotics were prescribed is treated.
Because of the potential seriousness of this disease,
most patients are given another antibiotic to control the
growth of the Clostridium difficile, usually vancomycin
(Vancocin) or metronidazole (Flagyl or Protostat). Both
are designed to be taken orally four times a day for 10-14
days. Upon finishing antibiotic treatment, approximately 15-20% of patients will experience a relapse of
diarrhea within one to five weeks. Mild relapses can go
untreated with great success, however, severe relapses of
diarrhea require another round of antibiotic treatment.
Instead of further antibiotic treatment, a cholestyramine
resin (Questran or Prevalite) may be given. The bacterial
toxins produced in the intestine stick to the resin and are
passed out with the resin in the stool. Unfortunately,
however, vancomycin also sticks to the resin, so these
two drugs cannot be taken at the same time. Serious
disease may require hospitalization so that the patient
can be monitored, treated, and rehydrated.
Alternative treatment
The goal of alternative treatment for antibioticassociated enterocolitis is to repopulate the intestinal
environment with microorganisms that are normal and
healthy for the intestinal tract. These microorgansisms
then compete for space and keep the Clostridium
difficile from over-populating.
Several types of supplements can be used.
Supplements containing Lactobacillus acidophilus, the
bacteria commonly found in yogurt and some types of
milk, Lactobacillus bifidus, and Streptococcus faecium,
are available in many stores in powder, capsule, tablet,
and liquid form. Acidophilus also acts as a mild antibiotic, which helps it to reestablish itself in the intestine,
and all may aid in the production of some B vitamins
and vitamin K. These supplements can be taken individually and alternated weekly or together following one
or more courses of antibiotics.
Prognosis
With appropriate treatment and replenishment of
fluids, the prognosis is generally excellent. One or more
relapses can occur. Very severe colitis can cause a tear
(perforation) in the wall of the large intestine that would
require major surgery. Perforation of the intestine can
cause a serious abdominal infection. Antibiotic-associated colitis can be fatal in people who are elderly
and/or have a serious underlying illness, such as cancer.
Prevention
There are no specific preventative measures for this
disease. Good general health can reduce the chance of
developing a bacterial infection that would require antibiotic treatment and the chance of picking up the
Clostridia bacteria. Maintaining good general health
can also reduce the seriousness and length of the condition, should it develop following antibiotic therapy.