Definition
Antianemia drugs are therapeutic agents which
increase either the number of red cells or the amount
of hemoglobin in the blood.
Purpose
Anemia is a general term for a large number of
conditions marked by a reduction in the oxygencarrying capacity of blood. Red blood cells carry
oxygen in hemoglobin, so that anemia may be caused
by a deficiency of blood or red blood cells or of hemoglobin. These conditions may be caused by a variety
of other conditions. Injury can cause blood loss, which
in turn can cause anemia. Nutritional deficiency,
inadequate amounts of some of the vitamins and
minerals that are needed for hemoglobin production,
may also cause anemia. Because hemoglobin is the
pigment that makes blood cells red, a lack of hemoglobin will cause the cells to be a paler color, leading
to the term hypochromic, lacking in color.
Other conditions can also cause anemia. For
example, certain diseases cause the condition. These
can include infections and kidney disease, in which
there is a deficiency of erythropoietin, a material produced in the kidneys which is essential for the production of red blood cells. Certain genetic conditions
affect the absorption of nutrients and may lead to
anemia. In sickle cell anemia, a genetic condition in
which the red cells are curved rather than flat, the red
cells have reduced ability to carry oxygen.
The Merck Manual reduces all types of anemia to
three classes:

blood loss

inadequate production of blood

excessive breakdown of blood cells
Anemia may be caused by one or a combination
of these three factors. Drug therapy is available for
many types of anemia; however, the selection of the
drug depends on proper diagnosis of the cause of the
anemia.
Description
Anemia caused by blood loss is normally treated
with either blood volume expanders such as plasma or
with related blood products. More severe blood loss
may require transfusions of red blood cells.
In some cases, blood loss may be due to ulcers of
the stomach or intestines. In these cases, treatment of
the underlying cause will normally correct the anemia.
Iron deficiency
The most common cause of anemia in adults is
iron deficiency. Although the typical American diet
contains enough iron to meet normal needs, individuals
who are less able to absorb and store iron may experience inadequate hemoglobin production. Although the
best way to meet daily iron requirements is through
improved diet, iron supplements are widely used.
Iron is normally taken in the form of ferrous
sulfate. Although other iron salts are commercially
available and make claims of fewer or less severe side
effects, these benefits may be related to the fact that
other preparations contain less iron by weight.
Ferrous sulfate contains about 37% iron, while ferrous gluconate contains only about 13% iron. People
who have trouble with the side effects of ferrous
sulfate may benefit from some of the specialty preparations available, but ferrous sulfate normally
offers the greatest amount of iron of all commercial
products.Recommended dosage
Dosage should be calculated by iron needs, based
on laboratory tests. Manufacturers recommend one
tablet a day, containing 65 mg of iron, as a supplement
for patients over the age of 12 years.
Precautions
Iron can lead to lethal poisoning in children. All
iron supplements should be kept carefully out of reach
of children.
Some types of anemia do not respond to iron
therapy, and the use of iron should be avoided in
these cases. People with acquired hemolytic anemia,
autoimmune hemolytic anemia, hemochromatosis,
hemolytic anemia and hemosiderosis should not take
iron supplements. Hemolytic anemia is caused by
the increased breakdown of red blood cells.
Hemochromatosis and hemosiderosis and are conditions in which there is too much, rather than too little,
absorption of iron.
Iron supplements should also be avoided by people who have gastric or intestinal ulcers, ulcerative
colitis, or Crohn’s disease. These conditions marked
by inflammation of the digestive tract, which would be
made worse by use of iron.
Side effects
The most common side effects of iron consumption are stomach and intestinal problems, including
stomach upset with cramps, constipation, diarrhea,
nausea, and vomiting. At least 25% of patients have
one or more of these side effects. The frequency and
severity of the side effects increases with the dose of
iron. Less frequent side effects include heartburn and
urine discoloration.
Interactions
Iron supplements should not be taken at the same
time as antibiotics of either the tetracycline or quinolone types. The iron will reduce the effectiveness of the
antibiotic. Also, iron supplements reduces the effectiveness of levodopa, which is used in treatment of
Parkinson’s disease.
Iron supplements should not be used with magnesium trisilicate, an antacid, or with penicillamine,
which is used for some types of arthritis.
Taking iron with vitamin C increases the absorption of iron, with no increase in side effects.
Folic acid
Folic acid is found in many common foods,
including liver, dried peas, lentils, oranges, wholewheat products, asparagus, beets, broccoli, brussel
sprouts, and spinach. However, in some cases, patients
have difficulty absorbing folic acid or in converting it
from the form found in foods to the form that is active
in blood formation. In these cases, folic acid tablets are
appropriate for use.
RECOMMENDED DOSAGE. For treatment of anemia, a daily dose of 1 mg is generally used. Patients
who have trouble absorbing folic acid may require
higher doses.
Maintenance doses are:

infants: 0.1 mg/day

children (under 4 years of age): up to 0.3 mg/day

children (over 4 years of age) and adults: 0.4 mg/day

pregnant and lactating women: 0.8 mg/day
 PRECAUTIONS.
Before treating an anemia with
folic acid, diagnostic tests must be performed to verify
the cause of the anemia. Pernicious anemia caused by
lack of vitamin B12 shows symptoms that are very
similar to those of folic acid deficiency but also causes
nerve damage which shows up as a tingling sensation
and feelings of numbness. Giving folic acid to patients
with B12 deficiency anemia improves the blood cell
count, but the nerve damage continues to progress.
SIDE EFFECTS. Folic acid is considered extremely
safe, and there are no predictable side effects. Where
side effects have been reported, they have been among
patients taking many times more than the normal
therapeutic dose of the drug.
On rare occasions allergic reactions to folic acid
have been reported.
 INTERACTIONS.
 Phenytoins, used to treat seizure
disorders, interact with folic acid with a reduction in
phenytoin effectiveness and an increased risk of
seizures. If the two drugs must be used together, phenytoin blood levels should be monitored, and the dose
may have to be increased.
Trimethoprim (an antibacterial) and methotrexate (originally an anti-cancer drug, which is also used
for arthritis and psoriasis) act by reducing the metabolism of folic acid. Regular blood monitoring is
required, and dose adjustments may be needed.
Vitamin B12
Vitamin B12 is also known as cyanocobalamine
and hydroxocobalamine. Cyanocobalamine may be
given by mouth, while hydroxocobalamine must be
injected. The vitamin has many functions in the
body, including maintaining the nervous system, but
in treatment of anemia B12 is needed for the metabolism of folic acid. Lack of B12 causes pernicious anemia, a type of anemia which is marked by a low red cell
count and lack of hemoglobin. There are many other
symptoms of pernicious anemia, including a feeling of
tingling or numbness, shortness of breath, muscle
weakness, faintness, and a smooth tongue. If pernicious anemia is left untreated for more than three
months, permanent damage to the nerves of the spinal
cord may result.
RECOMMENDED DOSAGE. While vitamin B12 can
be given by mouth for mild vitamin deficiency states,
pernicious anemia should always be treated with injections, either under the skin (subcutaneous) or into
muscle (intramuscular). Hydroxocobalamine should
only be injected into muscle. Intravenous injections
are not used because the vitamin is eliminated from
the body too quickly when given this way. Elderly
patients, whose ability to absorb vitamin B12 through
the stomach may be impaired, should also be treated
with injections only.
The normal dose of cyanocobalamine is 100 mcg
(micrograms) daily for six to seven days. If improvement is seen, the dose may be reduced to 100 mcg every
other day for seven doses and then 100 mcg every three
to four days for two to three weeks. After that,
monthly injections may be required for life.
 PRECAUTIONS. Although vitamin B12 has a very
high level of safety, commercial preparations may
contain preservatives which may cause allergic
responses.
In patients with pernicious anemia, treatment
with vitamin B12 may lead to loss of potassium.
Patients should be monitored for their potassium
levels.
SIDE EFFECTS. Diarrhea and itching of the skin
have been reported on rare occasions. Moreover,
there have been reports of severe allergic reactions to
cyanocobalamine.
 INTERACTIONS. Aminosalicylic acid may reduce
the effectiveness of vitamin B12. Also, colchicine, a
drug used for gout, may reduce the effectiveness
of vitamin B12. Other, infrequently used drugs and
excessive use of alcohol may also affect the efficacy
of vitamin B12. Patients being treated for anemia
should discuss all medications, both prescription
and nonprescription, with their physician or
pharmacist.
Anabolic steroids
The anabolic steroids (nandrolone, oxymetholone, oxandrolone, and stanzolol) are the same drugs
that are used improperly by body builders to increase
muscle mass. Two of these drugs, nandrolone and
oxymetholone, are approved for use in treatment of
anemia. Nandrolone is indicated for treatment of anemia caused by kidney failure, while oxymetholone
may be used to treat anemia caused by insufficient
red cell production, such as aplastic anemia.
All anabolic steroids are considered to be drugs of
abuse under United States federal law.
RECOMMENDED DOSAGE. The information that
follows is specific only to oxymetholone; however,
the warnings and precautions apply to all drugs in
the class of anabolic steroids.
The dosage of oxymetholone must be individualized. The most common dose is 1 to 2 mg per kilogram
of body weight per day, although doses as high as 5 mg
per kilogram per day have been used. The response to
these drugs is slow, and it may take several months to
see if there is any benefit.
 PRECAUTIONS.
  All anabolic steroids are dangerous. The following warnings represent the most
significant hazards of these drugs. For a complete
list, patients should consult the manufacturer’s package insert.

Peliosis hepatitis, a condition in which liver and
sometimes spleen tissue is replaced with blood-filled
cysts, has occurred in patients receiving androgenic
anabolic steroids. Although this condition is usually
reversible by discontinuing the drug, if it is left undetected and untreated, it may lead to life-threatening
liver failure or bleeding.

Liver tumors may develop. Although most of these
tumors are benign and will go away when the drug is
discontinued, liver cancers may also result.

Anabolic steroids may cause changes in blood lipids,
leading to atherosclerosis with greatly increased risk
of heart attack.

Because anabolic steroids are derived from male sex
hormones, masculinization may occur when they are
used by women.

Elderly men who use these drugs may be at increased
risk of prostate enlargement and prostate cancer.

Increased water retention due to anabolic steroids
may lead to heart failure.

Anabolic steroids should not be used during
pregnancy, since this may cause masculinization of
the fetus.
Anabolic steroids should be used in children only if
there is no possible alternative. These drugs may
cause the long bones of the legs to stop growing
prematurely, leading to reduction in adult height.
Regular monitoring is essential.

In patients with epilepsy, the frequency of seizures
may be increased.

In patients with diabetes, glucose tolerance may be
altered. Careful monitoring is essential.
SIDE EFFECTS. The list of side effects associated
with anabolic steroids is extremely long. The following
list covers only the most commonly observed effects:

acne

increased urinary frequency

breast growth in males

breast pain

persistent, painful erections

masculinization in women
 INTERACTIONS. Anabolic steroids should not be
used in combination with anticoagulants such as warfarin. Anabolic steroids increase the effects of the
anticoagulant, possibly leading to bleeding. If the
combination cannot be avoided, careful monitoring
is essential.
Epoetin alfa
Epoetin alfa is a synthetic form of a protein produced by the kidneys that stimulates the production
and release of red blood cells. A similar drug, darepoetin alpha, is available with the same properties, but
it remains active longer and so requires fewer injections each week. Because epoetin alfa is approved for
more types of anemia than darepoetin, this discussion
deals only with the older drug.
Epoetin alpha is approved by the Food and Drug
Administration for the following uses:

anemia associated with chronic renal failure

anemia related to zidovudine therapy in HIVinfected patients

anemia in cancer patients on chemotherapy

reduction in blood transfusions in surgical patients
In addition, epoetin alpha may be useful in anemia from many other causes. These include but are not
limited to anemia of prematurity, sickle cell anemia,
and the anemia associated with rheumatoid arthritis.
The drug has been abused by athletes due to the
theory that increasing the red blood cell count
improves athletic performance. The potential benefits
of misuse of the drug are limited, and the risks are
significant. The United States and International
Olympic Committees and the National Collegiate
Athletic Association consider the use of epoetin alfa
to enhance athletic ergogenic potential inappropriate
and unacceptable because its use by athletes is contrary to the rules and ethical principles of athletic
competition. As of the early 200s, tests to detect the
misuse of epoetin alfa by athletes are increasingly
reliable.
RECOMMENDED DOSAGE. Dosing schedules may
vary with the cause of the anemia. All doses should
be individualized. In general, epoetin alpha dosing
in adults is started at 50 to 100 units per kilogram
given three times a week, either by vein or subcutaneously.
The dose should be reduced if the hemoglobin
level reaches 12 grams per decaliter or if the hemoglobin level increases by more than 1 gram per decaliter in
any two-week period. The drug should be interrupted
if hemoglobin levels reach 13 grams or more per
decaliter.
The dose should be increased if the hemoglobin
level does not increase by at least 2 grams per decaliter
after eight weeks of treatment.
Maintenance doses, if required, should be individualized to keep the hemoglobin levels within the
range of 10 to 12 grams per decaliter.
 PRECAUTIONS. Epoetin alpha should not be given
to patients with severe, uncontrolled hypertension.
Other conditions in which epoetin alpha should be
used only when the benefits clearly outweigh the risks
are as follows:

constitutional aplastic anemia

hypertension

thromboembolism
Side effects
The most common adverse effects of erythopoetin
alpha are:

joint pain

chest pain

diarrhea

swelling

fatigue

fever

weakness
headache

high blood pressure

irritation at injection site

nausea

vomiting

rapid heart beat
A large number of additional adverse effects have
been reported. Patients should consult the manufacturer’s package insert for the full list.
Interactions
According to the manufacturer, as of 2004 no
evidence of interaction of epoetin alfa with other
drugs was observed.