Definition
Antihistamines are drugs that block the action of
histamine (a compound released in allergic inflammatory reactions) at the H1 receptor sites, responsible for
immediate hypersensitivity reactions such as sneezing
and itching. Members of this class of drugs may also be
used for their side effects, including sedation and antiemesis (prevention of nausea and vomiting).
Purpose
Antihistamines provide their primary action by
blocking histamine H1 at the receptor site. They have
no effect on rate of histamine release, nor do they
inactivate histamine. By inhibiting the activity of
histamine, they can reduce capillary fragility, which
produces the erythema, or redness, associated with
allergic reactions. They will also reduce histamineinduced secretions, including excessive tears and
salivation. Additional effects vary with the individual drug used. Several of the older drugs, called
first-generation antihistamines, bind non-selectively
to H1 receptors in the central nervous system as
well as to peripheral receptors, and can produce
sedation, inhibition of nausea and vomiting, and
reduction of motion sickness. The second-generation
antihistamines bind only to peripheral H1 receptors,
and reduce allergic response with little or no
sedation.
The first-generation antihistamines may be
divided into several chemical classes. The side effect
profile, which also determines the uses of the drugs,
will vary by chemical class. The alkylamines include
brompheniramine (Dimetapp) and chlorpheniramine
(Chlor-Trimeton.) These agents cause relatively little
sedation, and are used primarily for treatment of allergic reactions. Promethazine (Phenergan), in contrast,
is a phenothiazine, chemically related to the major
tranquilizers, and while it is used for treatment of allergies, may also be used as a sedative, the relieve anxiety
prior to surgery, as an anti-nauseant, and for control of
motion sickness. Diphenhydramine (Benadryl) is chemically an ethanolamine, and in addition to its role in
reducing allergic reactions, may be used as a nighttime
sedative, for control of drug-induced Parkinsonism,
and, in liquid form, for control of coughs. Consult
more detailed references for further information.
The second generation antihistamines have no
central action, and are used only for treatment of
allergic reactions. These are divided into two chemical
classes. Cetirizine (Zyrtec) is a piperazine derivative,
and has a slight sedative effect. Loratidine (Claritin)
and fexofenadine (Allegra) are members of the piperadine class and are essentially non-sedating.
Recommended dosage
Dosage varies with drug, patient and intended
use. Consult more detailed references for further
information.
When used for control of allergic reactions, antihistamines should be taken on a regular schedule,
rather than on an as-needed basis, since they have no
effect on histamine itself, nor on histamine already
bound to the receptor site.
Efficacy is highly variable from patient to patient. If
an antihistamine fails to provide adequate relief, switch
to a drug from a different chemical class. Individual
drugs may be effective in no more than 40% of patients,
and provide 50% relief of allergic symptoms.
Side effects
The frequency and severity of adverse effects will
vary between drugs. Not all adverse reactions will
apply to every member of this class.
Central nervous system reactions include drowsiness,
sedation, dizziness, faintness, disturbed coordination, lassitude,confusion, restlessness,excitation, tremor, seizures,
headache, insomnia, euphoria, blurred vision, hallucinations, disorientation, disturbing dreams/nightmares, schizophrenic-like reactions, weakness, vertigo, hysteria,
nerve pain, and convulsions. Overdoses may cause involuntary movements. Other problems have been reported.
Gastrointestinal problems include increased
appetite, decreased appetite, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and constipation.
Hematologic reactions are rare, but may be
severe. These include anemia, or breakdown of red
blood cells; reduced platelets; reduced white cells; and
bone marrow failure.
A large number of additional reactions have been
reported. Not all apply to every drug, and some reactions may not be drug related. Some of the other adverse
effects are chest tightness;wheezing; nasal stuffiness; dry
mouth, nose and throat;sore throat; respiratory depression; sneezing; and a burning sensation in the nose.
When taking antihistamines during pregnancy,
Chlorpheniramine (Chlor-Trimeton), dexchlorpheniramine (Polaramine), diphenhydramine (Benadryl),
brompheniramine (Dimetapp), cetirizine (Zyrtec),
cyproheptadine (Periactin), clemastine (Tavist), azatadine (Optimine), loratadine (Claritin) are all listed
as category B. Azelastine (Astelin), hydroxyzine
(Atarax), promethazine (Phenergan) are category C.
Regardless of chemical class of the drug, it is
recommended that mothers not breast feed while
taking antihistamines.
Contraindications
The following are absolute or relative contraindications to use of antihistamines. The significance of
the contraindication will vary with the drug and dose.

glaucoma

hyperthyroidism (overactive thyroid)

high blood pressure

enlarged prostate

heart disease

ulcers or other stomach problems

stomach or intestinal blockage

liver disease

kidney disease

bladder obstruction

diabetes
Interactions
Monoamine oxidase inhibitor antidepressants
(phenelzine [Nardil], tranylcypromine [Parnate]) may
prolong and increase the effects of some antihistamines. When used with promethazine (Phenergan)
this may cause reduced blood pressure and involuntary movements.