Definition
Antimalarial drugs are medicines that prevent or
treat malaria.
Purpose
Antimalarial drugs treat or prevent malaria, a
disease that occurs in tropical, subtropical, and
some temperate regions of the world. The disease
is caused by a parasite, Plasmodium, which belongs
to a group of one-celled organisms known as protozoa. The only way to get malaria is to be bitten by a
certain type of mosquito that has bitten someone
who has the disease. Thanks to mosquito control
programs, malaria has been eliminated in the
United States, almost all of Europe, and large
parts of Central and South America. However, mosquito control has not worked well in other parts
of the world, and malaria continues to be a
major health problem in parts of Africa, Southeast
Asia, Latin America, Haiti, the Dominican Republic,
and some Pacific Islands. Every year, some
30,000 Americans and Europeans who travel to
these areas get malaria. People planning to travel to
the tropics are often advised to take antimalarial
drugs before, during, and after their trips, to help
them avoid getting the disease and bringing it home
with them. These drugs kill Plasmodium or prevent
its growth.
In recent years, some strains of Plasmodium
have become resistant to antimalarial drugs, and
medical researchers have stepped up efforts to
develop a malaria vaccine. In early 1997, researchers reported encouraging results from a small study
of one vaccine and planned to test the vaccine
in Africa.
Description
Antimalarial drugs are available only with a physician’s prescription. They come in tablet, capsule, and
injectable forms. Among the commonly used antimalarial drugs are chloroquine (Aralen), mefloquine
(Lariam), primaquine, pyrimethamine (Daraprim),
and quinine. Other drugs are constantly in development. In early 2004, scientists were researching promising new agents called beat-amino hydroxamates
and amino acid-conjugated quinolinamines.
Recommended dosage
Recommended dosage depends on the type of
antimalarial drug, its strength, and the form in which
it is being used (such as tablet or injection). The dosage
may also be different for different people. The physician who prescribed the drug or the pharmacist who
filled the prescription can recommend the correct
dosage. This medicine should be taken exactly as
directed and for the full time of treatment. If the
drug is being taken to treat malaria, it should not be
stopped just because symptoms begin to improve.
Symptoms may return if the drug is stopped too
soon. Larger or more frequent doses than the physician has ordered should never be taken, nor should the
drug be taken for longer than directed.
Travelers taking this medicine to prevent malaria
may be told to take it for one to two weeks before their
trip and for four weeks afterward, as well as for the
whole time they are away. It is important to follow
these directions.
Antimalarial drugs work best when they are taken
on a regular schedule. When taken once a week to
prevent malaria, they should be taken on the same day
every week. When taken daily or several times a day to
treat malaria, they should be taken at the same time
every day. Doses should not be missed or skipped.
Some antimalarial drugs should be taken with
meals or with milk to prevent upset stomach. Others
must be taken with a full glass of water. It is important
to follow directions along with the prescription.
Precautions
Antimalarial drugs may cause lightheadedness,
dizziness, blurred vision and other vision changes.
Anyone who takes these drugs should not drive, use
machines or do anything else that might be dangerous
until they have found out how the drugs affect them.
The antimalarial drug mefloquine (Lariam) has
received attention because of reports that it causes
panic attacks, hallucinations, anxiety, depression,
paranoia, and other mental and mood changes, sometimes lasting for months after the last dose. In fact, the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) began
requiring warnings with Lariam beginning in July
2003 because of serious psychiatric effects caused by
the drug. Pharmacists are required to include a 2,000-
word medication guide detailing the warnings.
Anyone who has unexplained anxiety, depression,
restlessness, confusion, or other troubling mental or
mood changes after taking mefloquine should call a
physician right away. Switching to a different antimalarial drug may be an alternative and can allow the side
effects to stop.
Anyone taking antimalarial drugs to prevent
malaria who develops a fever or flu-like symptoms
while taking the medicine or within 2-3 months after
traveling to an area where malaria is common should
call a physician immediately.
If the medicine is being taken to treat malaria, and
symptoms stay the same or get worse, The patient
should check with the physician who prescribed the
medicine.
Patients who take this medicine over a long period
of time need to have a physician check them periodically for unwanted side effects.
Babies and children are especially sensitive to the
antimalarial drug chloroquine. Not only are they more
likely to have side effects from the medicine, but they
are also at greater risk of being harmed by an overdose. A single 300-mg tablet could kill a small child.
This medicine should be kept out of the reach of children
and safety vials should be used.
Special conditions
People with certain medical conditions or who are
taking certain other medicines can have problems if
they take antimalarial drugs. Before taking these
drugs, the physician should know about any of these
conditions:
 ALLERGIES. Anyone who has had unusual reactions to antimalarial drugs or related medicines in
the past should let his or her physician know before
taking the drugs again. The physician should also be
told about any allergies to foods, dyes, preservatives,
or other substances.
 PREGNANCY. In laboratory animal studies, some
antimalarial drugs cause birth defects. But it is also
risky for a pregnant woman to get malaria. Untreated
malaria can cause premature birth, stillbirth, and
miscarriage. When given in low doses to prevent
malaria, antimalarial drugs have not been reported
to cause birth defects in humans. If possible, pregnant
women should avoid traveling to areas where they
could get malaria. If travel is necessary, women who
are pregnant or who may become pregnant should
check with their physicians about the use of antimalarial drugs.
 BREASTFEEDING. Some antimalarial drugs pass
into breast milk. Although no problems have been
reported in nursing babies whose mothers took antimalarial drugs, babies and young children are particularly sensitive to some of these drugs. Women who are
breastfeeding should check with their physicians
before using antimalarial drugs.
OTHER MEDICAL CONDITIONS. Before using antimalarial drugs, people who have any of these medical problems (or have had them in the past) should
make sure their physicians are aware of their
conditions:

Blood disease

Liver disease

Nerve or brain disease or disorder, including seizures
(convulsions)

Past or current mental disorder

Stomach or intestinal disease

Deficiency of the enzyme glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD), which is important in the breakdown of sugar in the body

Deficiency of the enzyme nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) methemoglobin reductase

Psoriasis

Heart disease

Family or personal history of the genetic condition
favism (a hereditary allergic condition)

Family or personal history of hemolytic anemia, a
condition in which red blood cells are destroyed

Purpura

Hypoglycemia (low blood sugar)

Blackwater fever (a serious complication of one type
of malaria)

Myasthenia gravis (a disease of the nerves and
muscles).
USE OF CERTAIN MEDICINES. Taking antimalarial
drugs with certain other drugs may affect the way
the drugs work or may increase the chance of side
effects.
Side effects
High doses of the antimalarial drug pyrimethamine may cause blood problems that can interfere with
healing and increase the risk of infection. People taking this drug should be careful not to injure their gums
when brushing or flossing their teeth or using toothpicks. If possible, dental work should be postponed
until treatment is complete and the blood has returned
to normal.
The most common side effects of antimalarial
drugs are diarrhea, nausea or vomiting, stomach
cramps or pain, loss of appetite, headache, itching,
difficulty concentrating, dizziness, lightheadedness,
and sleep problems. These problems usually go away
as the body adjusts to the drug and do not require
medical treatment. Less common side effects, such as
hair loss or loss of color in the hair; skin rash; or blueblack discoloration of the skin, fingernails, or inside of
the mouth also may occur and do not need medical
attention unless they are long-lasting.
More serious side effects are not common, but
may occur. If any of the following side effects occur,
the physician who prescribed the medicine should be
contacted immediately:

Blurred vision or any other vision changes

Convulsions (seizures)

Mood or mental changes

Hallucinations

Anxiety

Confusion

Weakness or unusual tiredness

Unusual bruising or bleeding

Hearing loss or ringing or buzzing in the ears

Fever, with or without sore throat

Slow heartbeat

Pain in the back or legs

Dark urine

Pale skin

Taste changes

Soreness, swelling, or burning sensation in the
tongue.
Other rare side effects may occur. Anyone who
has unusual symptoms after taking anantimalarial
drug should get in touch with his or her physician.
Interactions
Some antimalarial drugs may interact with other
medicines. When this happens, the effects of one or
both of the drugs may change or the risk of side effects
may be greater. Anyone who takes antimalarial drugs
should let the physician know all other medicines he or
she is taking. Among the drugs that interact with some
antimalarial drugs are:

Beta blockers such as atenolol (Tenormin), propranolol (Inderal), and metoprolol (Lopressor)

Calcium channel blockers such as diltiazem
(Cardizem), nicardipene (Cardene), and nifedipine
(Procardia)

Other antimalarial drugs

Quinidine, used to treat abnormal heart rhythms

Antiseizure medicines such as vaproic acid derivatives (Depakote or Depakene)

Oral typhoid vaccine

Diabetes medicines taken by mouth

Sulfonamides (sulfa drugs)

Vitamin K

Anticancer drugs

Medicine for overactive thyroid

Antiviral drugs such as zidovudine (Retrovir).
The list above does not include every medicine
that may interact with every antimalarial drug. It is
advised to check with a physician or pharmacist before
combining an antimalarial drug with any other
prescription or nonprescription (over-the-counter)
medicine.