Definition
Anticonvulsant drugs are medicines used to prevent or treat convulsions (seizures).
Purpose
Anticonvulsant drugs are used to control seizures
in people with epilepsy. Epilepsy is not a single disease—it is a set of symptoms that may have different
causes in different people. The common thread is an
imbalance in the brain’s electrical activity. This imbalance causes seizures that may affect part or all of the
body and may or may not cause a loss of consciousness. Anticonvulsant drugs act on the brain to reduce
the frequency and severity of seizures.
Some cases of epilepsy are brought on by head
injuries, brain tumors or infections, or metabolic problems such as low blood sugar. But in some people
with epilepsy, the cause is not clear.
Anticonvulsant drugs are an important part of the
treatment program for epilepsy. Different kinds of
drugs may be prescribed for different types of seizures.
In addition to taking medicine, patients with epilepsy
should get enough rest, avoid stress, and practice good
health habits.
Some physicians believe that giving the drugs to
children with epilepsy may prevent the condition from
getting worse in later life. However, others say the
effects are the same, whether treatment is started
early or later in life. Determining when treatment
begins depends on the physician and his assessment
of the patient’s symptoms.
Physicians also prescribe certain anticonvulsant
drugs for other conditions, including bipolar disorder
and migraine headaches.
Description
Anticonvulsant drugs may be divided into several
classes. The hydantoins include pheytoin (Dilantin) and
mephenytoin (Mesantoin.) Ther succimides include
ethosuximide (Zarontin) and methsuccimide (Celontin.)
The benzodiazepines, which are better known for their
use as tranquilizers and sedatives, include clonazepam
(Klonopin), clorazepate (Tranxene) and diazepam
(Valium.) There are also a large number of other drugs
which are not related to larger groups. These include
carbamazepine (Tegretol), valproic acid (Depakote,
Depakene) gabapentin (Neurontin), topiramate
(Topamax), felbamate (Felbatol) and several others.
Phenobarbital has been used as an anticonvulsant, and
is still useful for some patients. The drugs are available
only with a physician’s prescription and come in tablet,
capsule, liquid, and ‘‘sprinkle’’ forms.
Recommended dosage
The recommended dosage depends on the type of
anticonvulsant, its strength, and the type of seizures
for which it is being taken. Check with the physician
who prescribed the drug or the pharmacist who filled
the prescription for the correct dosage.
Do not stop taking this medicine suddenly after
taking it for several weeks or more. Gradually tapering
the dose may reduce the chance of withdrawal effects.
Do not change brands or dosage forms of this
medicine without checking with a pharmacist or physician. If a prescription refill does not look like the
original medicine, check with the pharmacist who
filled the prescription.
Precautions
Patients on anticonvulsant drugs should see a
physician regularly while on therapy, especially during
the first few months. The physician will check to make
sure the medicine is working as it should and will note
unwanted side effects. The physician may also need to
adjust the dosage during this period.
Valproic acid can cause serious liver damage,
especially in the first 6 months of treatment. Children
are particularly at risk, but anyone taking this medicine should see their physician regularly for tests of
liver function and should be alert to symptoms of liver
damage, such as yellow skin and eyes, facial swelling,
loss of appetite, general feeling of illness, loss of appetite, and vomiting. If liver problems are suspected, call
a physician immediately.
Felbatol has caused serious liver damage and
aplastic anemia, a condition in which the bone marrow stops producing blood cells. Patients taking this
drug should have regular blood counts, and should
stop taking the drug if there are too few red blood
cells.
While taking anticonvulsant drugs, do not start or
stop taking any other medicines without checking with
a physician. The other medicines may affect the way
the anticonvulsant medicine works.
Because anticonvulsant drugs work on the central
nervous system, they may add to the effects of alcohol
and other drugs that slow down the central nervous
system, such as antihistamines, cold medicine, allergy
medicine, sleep aids, other medicine for seizures, tranquilizers, some pain relievers, and muscle relaxants.
Anyone taking anticonvulsant drugs should check with
his or her physician before drinking alcohol or taking
any medicines that slow the central nervous system.
Anticonvulsant drugs may interact with medicines
used during surgery, dental procedures, or emergency
treatment. These interactions could increase the
chance of side effects. Anyone who is taking anticonvulsant drugs should be sure to tell the health care
professional in charge before having any surgical or
dental procedures or receiving emergency treatment.
Some people feel drowsy, dizzy, lightheaded, or
less alert when using these drugs, especially when they
first begin taking them or when their dosage is
increased. Anyone who takes anticonvulsant drugs
should not drive, use machines or do anything else
that might be dangerous until they have found out
how the drugs affect them.
Anticonvulsant drugs may affect the results of
certain medical tests. Before having medical tests, people who take anticonvulsant drugs should make sure
that the medical professional in charge knows what
they are taking.
Children may be more likely to have certain side
effects from anticonvulsant drugs, such as behavior
changes; tender, bleeding, or swollen gums; enlarged
facial features; and excessive hair growth. Problems
with the gums may be prevented by regularly brushing
and flossing, massaging the gums, and having the teeth
cleaned every 3 months whether the patient is a child
or an adult.
Children who take high doses of this medicine for
a long time may have problems in school.
Older people may be more sensitive to the effects
of anticonvulsant drugs. This may increase the chance
of side effects and overdoses.
Special conditions
People with certain medical conditions or who are
taking certain other medicines can have problems if
they take anticonvulsant drugs. Before taking these
drugs, be sure to let the physician know about any of
these conditions:
 ALLERGIES. Anyone who has had unusual reactions to anticonvulsant drugs or to tricyclic antidepressants such as imipramine (Tofranil) or desipramine
(Norpramin) in the past should let his or her physician
know before taking the drugs again. The physician
should also be told about any allergies to foods,
dyes, preservatives, or other substances.
 PREGNANCY. Some anticonvulsant drugs taken
during pregnancy may cause bleeding problems in the
mother during delivery and in the baby after delivery.
This problem can be avoided by giving vitamin K to the
mother during delivery and to the baby after birth.
Pregnancy may affect the way the body absorbs
anticonvulsant drugs. Women who are prone to seizures may have more seizures during pregnancy, even
though they are taking their medicine regularly. If this
happens, they should check with their physicians
about whether the dose needs to be increased.
 BREASTFEEDING. Some anticonvulsant drugs pass
into breastmilk andmay cause unwanted effectsin babies
whose mothers take the medicine. Women who are
breastfeeding should check with their physicians about
the benefits and risks of using anticonvulsant drugs.
 DIABETES. Anticonvulsant drugs may affect blood
sugar levels. Patients with diabetes who notice changes
in the results of their urine or blood tests should check
with their physicians.
OTHER MEDICAL CONDITIONS. Before using anticonvulsant drugs, people with any of these medical
problems should make sure their physicians are
aware of their conditions:

liver disease

kidney disease

thyroid disease

heart or blood vessel disease

blood disease

brain disease

problems with urination

current or past alcohol abuse
behavior problems

diabetes mellitus

glaucoma

porphyria

systemic lupus erythematosus

fever higher than 101 8F (38.3 8C) for more than
24 hours
USE OF CERTAIN MEDICINES. Taking anticonvulsant drugs with certain other drugs may affect the
way the drugs work or may increase the chance of
side effects.
Side effects
The most common side effects are constipation,
mild nausea or vomiting, and mild dizziness, drowsiness, or lightheadedness. These problems usually go
away as the body adjusts to the drug and do not
require medical treatment. Less common side effects,
such as diarrhea, sleep problems, aching joints or muscles, increased sensitivity to sunlight, increased sweating, hair loss, enlargement of facial features, excessive
hair growth, muscle twitching, and breast enlargement
in males also may occur and do not need medical
attention unless they persist or are troublesome.
Other side effects may need medical attention. If
any of these side effects occur, check with a physician
as soon as possible:

clumsiness or unsteadiness

slurred speech or stuttering

trembling

unusual excitement, irritability, or nervousness

uncontrolled eye movements

blurred or double vision

mood or mental changes

confusion

increase in seizures

bleeding, tender, or swollen gums

skin rash or itching

enlarged glands in neck or armpits

muscle weakness or pain

fever
Other side effects are possible. Anyone who has
unusual symptoms after taking anticonvulsant drugs
should get in touch with his or her physician.
Interactions
Some anticonvulsant drugs should not be taken
within two to three hours of taking antacids or medicine for diarrhea. These medicines may make the
anticonvulsant drugs less effective. Ask the pharmacist or physician for more information.
Birth control pills may not work properly when
anticonvulsant drugs are being taken. To prevent
pregnancy, ask the physician or pharmacist if additional methods of birth control should be used while
taking anticonvulsant drugs.
Anticonvulsant drugs may interact with many
other medicines. When this happens, the effects of
one or both of the drugs may change or the risk of
side effects may be greater. Anyone who takes anticonvulsant drugs should let the physician know all
other medicines he or she is taking. Among the
drugs that may interact with certain anticonvulsant
drugs are:

airway opening drugs (bronchodilators) such as aminophylline, theophylline (Theo-Dur and other brands),
and oxtriphylline (Choledyl and other brands)

medicines that contain calcium, such as antacids and
calcium supplements

blood thinning drugs

caffeine

antibiotics such as clarithromycin (Biaxin), erythromycins, and sulfonamides (sulfa drugs)

disulfiram (Antabuse), used to treat alcohol abuse

fluoxetine (Prozac)

monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAO inhibitors)
such as phenelzine (Nardil) or tranylcypromine
(Parnate), used to treat conditions including depression and Parkinson’s disease

tricyclic antidepressants such as imipramine (Tofranil)
or desipramine (Norpramin)

corticosteroids

acetaminophen (Tylenol)

aspirin

female hormones (estrogens)

male hormones (androgens)

cimetidine (Tagamet)

central nervous system (CNS) depressants such asmedicine for allergies, colds, hay fever, andasthma; sedatives;
tranquilizers; prescription pain medicine; muscle relaxants; medicine for seizures; sleep aids; barbiturates; and
anesthetics
alcohol

other anticonvulsant drugs
The list above does not include every drug that
may interact with anticonvulsant drugs. Be sure to
check with a physician or pharmacist before combining anticonvulsant drugs with any other prescription
or nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicine.