Definition
Antidiarrheal drugs are medicines that relieve
diarrhea.
Purpose
Antidiarrheal drugs help control diarrhea and some
of the symptoms that go along with it. An average,
healthy person has anywhere from three bowel movements a day to three a week, depending on that person’s
diet. Normally the stool (the material that is passed in a
bowel movement) has a texture something like clay.
With diarrhea, bowelmovementsmay bemore frequent,
and the texture of the stool is thin and sometimes watery.
Diarrhea is not a disease, but a symptom of some
other problem. The symptom may be caused by eating
or drinking food or water that is contaminated with
bacteria, viruses, or parasites, or by eating something
that is difficult to digest. People who have trouble
digesting lactose (milk sugar), for example, may get
diarrhea if they eat dairy products. Some cases of
diarrhea are caused by stress, while others are brought
on by taking certain medicines.
Description
Antidiarrheal drugs work in several ways. The
drug loperamide, found in Imodium A-D, for example,
slows the passage of stools through the intestines. This
allows more time for water and salts in the stools to be
absorbed back into the body. Adsorbents, such as attapulgite (found in Kaopectate) pull diarrhea-causing
substances from the digestive tract. However, they
may also pull out substances that the body needs,
such as enzymes and nutrients. Bismuth subsalicylate,
the ingredient in Pepto-Bismol, decreases the secretion
of fluid into the intestine and inhibits the activity of
bacteria. It not only controls diarrhea, but relieves the
cramps that often accompany diarrhea.
These medicines come in liquid, tablet, caplet, and
chewable tablet forms and can be bought without a
physician’s prescription.
Recommended dosage
The dose depends on the type of antidiarrheal
drug. Read and follow the directions on the product
label. For questions about dosage, check with a physician or pharmacist. Never take larger or more frequent doses, and do not take the drug for longer than
directed.
Precautions
Diarrhea usually improves within 24-48 hours. If
the problem lasts longer or if it keeps coming back,
diarrhea could be a sign of a more serious problem.
Anyone who has any of the symptoms listed below
should get medical attention as soon as possible:

diarrhea that lasts more than two days or gets worse

fever

blood in the stool

vomiting

cramps or tenderness in the abdomen

signs of dehydration, such as decreased urination,
dizziness or lightheadedness, dry mouth, increased
thirst, or wrinkled skin
Do not use antidiarrheal drugs for more than two
days unless told to do so by a physician.
Severe, long-lasting diarrhea can lead to dehydration. In such cases, lost fluids and salts, such as
calcium, sodium, and potassium, must be replaced.
People older than 60 should not use attapulgite
(Kaopectate, Donnagel, Parepectolin), but may use
other kinds of antidiarrheal drugs. However, people
in this age group may be more likely to have side
effects, such as severe constipation, from bismuth subsalicylate. Ask the pharmacist for more information.
Bismuth subsalicylate may cause the tongue or the
stool to temporarily darken. This is harmless.
However, do not confuse this harmless darkening of
the stool with the black, tarry stools that are a sign of
bleeding in the intestinal tract.
Children with flu or chicken pox should not be
given bismuth subsalicylate. It can lead to Reye’s syndrome, a life-threatening condition that affects the
liver and central nervous system. To be safe, never
give bismuth subsalicylate to a child under 16 years
without consulting a physician. Children may have
unpredictable reactions to other antidiarrheal drugs.
Loperamide should not be given to children under six
years and attapulgite should not be given to children
under three years unless directed by a physician.
Anyone who has a history of liver disease or who
has been taking antibioticsshould check with his or her
physician before taking the antidiarrheal drug loperamide. A physician should also be consulted before
anyone with acute ulcerative colitis or anyone who has
been advised to avoid constipation uses the drug.
Loperamide should not be used by people whose
diarrhea is caused by certain infections, such as salmonella or shigella. To be safe, check with a physician
before using this drug.
Anyone who has a medical condition that causes
weakness should check with a physician about the best
way to treat diarrhea.
Special conditions
Before taking antidiarrheal drugs, be sure to let
the physician know about any of these conditions:
 ALLERGIES. Anyone who has had unusual reactions
to aspirin or other drugs containing salicylates should
check with a physician before taking bismuth subsalicylate. Anyone who has developed a rash or other
unusual reactions after taking loperamide should not
take that drug again without checking with a physician.
The physician should also be told about any allergies to
foods, dyes, preservatives, or other substances.
PREGNANCY AND BREASTFEEDING. Women who
are pregnant or breastfeeding should check with their
physicians before using antidiarrheal drugs. They should
also ask advice on how to replace lost fluids and salts.
OTHER MEDICAL CONDITIONS. Before using antidiarrheal drugs, people with any of these medical problems should make sure their physicians are aware of
their conditions:

dysentery

gout

hemophilia or other bleeding problems

kidney disease

stomach ulcer

severe colitis

liver disease
USE OF CERTAIN MEDICINES. Taking antidiarrheal
drugs with certain other drugs may affect the way the
drugs work or may increase the chance of side effects.
Side effects
The most common side effects of attapulgite
are constipation, bloating, and fullness. Bismuth
subsalicylate may cause ringing in the ears, but
that side effect is rare. Possible side effects from
loperamide include skin rash, constipation, drowsiness, dizziness, tiredness, dry mouth, nausea, vomiting, and swelling, pain, and discomfort in the
abdomen. Some of these symptoms are the same
as those that occur with diarrhea, so it may be
difficult to tell if the medicine is causing the problems. Children may be more sensitive than adults
to certain side effects of loperamide, such as drowsiness and dizziness.
Other rare side effects may occur with any antidiarrheal medicine. Anyone who has unusual symptoms after taking an antidiarrhea drug should get in
touch with his or her physician.
Interactions
Attapulgite can decrease the effectiveness of other
medicines taken at the same time. Changing the times
at which the other medicines are taken may be necessary. Check with a physician or pharmacist to work
out the proper dose schedule.
Bismuth subsalicylate should not be taken with
aspirin or any other medicine that contains salicylate.
This drug may also interact with other drugs, such as
blood thinners (warfarin, for example), methotrexate,
the antigout medicine probenecid, and the antidiabetes drug tolbutamide. In addition, bismuth subsalicylate may interact with any drug that interacts with
aspirin. Anyone taking these drugs should check with
a physician or pharmacist before taking bismuth
subsalicylate.