Definition
Topical antifungal drugs are medicines applied to
the skin to treat skin infections caused by a fungus.
Purpose
Dermatologic fungal infections are usually
described by their location on the body: tinea pedis
(infection of the foot), tinea unguium (infection of the
nails), tinia capitis (infection of the scalp.) Three types
of fungus are involved in most skin infections:
Trichophyton, Epidermophyton, and Microsporum.
Mild infections are usually susceptible to topical
therapy, however severe or resistant infections may
require systemic treatment.
Description
There are a large number of drugs currently
available in topical form for fungal infections.
Other than the imidazoles, (miconazole [Micatin,
Miconazole], clotrimazole [Lotrimin], econazole
[Spectazole], ketoconazole [Nizoral], oxiconazole
[Oxistat], sulconazole [Exelderm]) and the
allylamine derivatives (butenafine [Mentax], naftifine [Naftin], terbinafine [Lamisil]), the drugs in
this therapeutic class are chemically distinct from
each other. All drugs when applied topically have
a good margin of safety, and most show a high
degree of effectiveness. There are no studies comparing drugs on which to base a recommendation
for drugs of choice. Although some of the topical
antifungals are available over-the-counter, they
may be as effective as prescription drugs for this
purpose.
Traditional antifungal drugs such as undecylinic
acid (Cruex, Desenex) and gentian violet (also known
as crystal violet) remain available, but have a lower
cure rate (complete eradication of fungus) than the
newer agents and are not recommended. Tolnaftate
(Tinactin) has a lower cure rate than the newer drugs,
but may be used prophylactically to prevent
infection.
Recommended dosage
All drugs are applied topically. Consult individual
product information for specific application
recommendations.
As with all topical products, selection of the
dosage form may be as important as proper drug
selection. Consider factors such as presence or
absence of hair on the affected area, and type of
skin to which the medication is to be applied. Thin
liquids may preferable for application to hairy areas,
creams for the hands and face, and ointments may be
preferable for the trunk and legs. Other dosage forms
available include shampoos and sprays. Ciclopirox
and triacetin are available in formulations for topical
treatment of nail fungus as well as skin infections
(ciclopirox as Penlac Nail Lacquer and triacetin as
Ony-Clear Nail).
Most topical antifungal drugs require four weeks
of treatment. Infections in some areas, particularly
the spaces between toes, may take up to six weeks
for cure.
Precautions
Most topical antifungal agents are well tolerated.
The most common adverse effects are localized irritation caused by the vehicle or its components. This may
include redness, itch, and a burning sensation. Some
direct allergic reactions are possible.
Topical antifungal drugs should only be applied in
accordance with labeled uses. They are not intended or
ophthalmic (eye) or otic (ear) use. Application to
mucous membranes should be limited to appropriate
formulations.
The antifungal drugs have not been evaluated for
safety in pregnancy and lactation on topical application under the pregnancy risk category system.
Although systemic absorption is probably low, review
specific references. Gentian violet is labeled with a
warning against use in pregnancy.
Interactions
Topical antifungal drugs have no recognized
drug-drug or food-drug interactions.