Definition
Antirheumatic drugs are drugs used to treat rheumatoid arthritis.
Purpose
Rheumatoid arthritis is a progressive form of
arthritis that has devastating effects on joints and
general health. It is classified as an auto-immune disease, because the disease is caused by the body’s own
immune system acting against the body itself.
Symptoms include painful, stiff, swollen joints, fever,
fatigue, and loss of appetite.
In recent years, there has been a change in attitude
concerning the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.
Physicians now use Disease Modifying Anti-Rheumatic
Drugs (DMARDs) early in the history of the disease and
are less inclined to wait for crippling stages before resorting to the more potent drugs. Fuller understanding of the
side-effects of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) has also stimulated reliance on other types
of antirheumatic drugs.
Description
The major classes of antirheumatic drugs include:
 Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs.
Drugs belonging to this class bring symptomatic
relief of both inflammation and pain, but have a
limited effect on the progressive bone and cartilage
loss associated with rheumatoid arthritis. They act
by slowing the body’s production of prostaglandins.
Common NSAIDs include: ibuprofen (Motrin,
Nuprin or Advil), naproxen (Naprosyn, Aleve) and
indomethacin (Indocin).
 Corticosteroids. These drugs are very powerful antiinflammatory agents. They are the synthetic analogs
of cortisone, produced by the body. Corticosteroids
are used to reduce inflammation and suppress
activity of the immune system. The most commonly
prescribed are prednisone and dexamethasone.
 Disease Modifying Anti-Rheumatic Drugs
(DMARDs). DMARDs influence the disease process
itself and do not only treat symptoms, hence their
name. DMARDs also have anti-inflammatory effects,
and most were borrowed from the treatment of other
diseases, such as cancer and malaria. Antimalarials
DMARDs include chloroquine (Aralen) and hydroxychloroquine (Plaquenil). Powerful DMARDs include:
methotrexate (Rheumatrex), sulfasalazine, cyclosporine, azathioprine (Imuran) and cyclophosphamide
(Cytoxan), azathioprine, sulfasalazine, penicillamine,
and organic gold compounds such as aurothioglucose
(Solganol), gold sodium thiomalate (Aurolate) and
auranofin (Ridaura).
 Slow-Acting Antirheumatic Drugs (SAARDs).
SAARDs are a special class of DMARDs and the
effect of these drugs is slow acting and not so quickly
apparent as that of the NSAIDs. Examples are
hydroxychloroquine and aurothioglucose.
 Immunosuppresive cytotoxic drugs. This class of
drugs is used if treatment with NSAIDs and
SAARDs have no effect. Immunosuppresive drugs
have a stabilizing effect on the immune system.
Since the inflammation associated with chronic
arthritis is due to malfunctions of the immune
system, use of this class of drugs has been shown
to be beneficial for the treatment of rheumatoid
arthritis as well. Examples are: methotrexate,
mechlorethamine, cyclophosphamide, chlorambucil, and azathioprine.
Recommended dosage
Recommended dosage depends on the type of
drug. The prescribing physician or the pharmacist
provide information for the correct dosage. The
drugs must be taken exactly as directed.
When taking methotrexate for rheumatoid arthritis, it should be taken only once or twice a week as
prescribed, not every day. Taking it every day can lead
to a fatal overdose.
Precautions
Many antirheumatic drugs such as, for example,
azathioprine (Imuran) and methotrexate
(Rheumatrex), are very powerful drugs. They are
usually prescribed in severe cases, when all other treatments have failed. Thus, they may have serious side
effects, so it is important to be monitored closely by a
physician while taking any of these drugs.
Side effects
Hydroxychloroquine (Plaquenil) may cause vision
problems. Anyone taking it should see an ophthalmologist (a physician who specializes in treating eyes) for a
thorough eye examination every six months.
Methotrexate and penicillamine may cause birth
defects. Women taking these drugs must stop taking
them during pregnancy and for several months before
a planned pregnancy. Methotrexate may also cause
lung damage or fertility problems and should not be
taken by anyone with serious kidney or liver disease or
by anyone who drinks alcohol.
Azathioprine may cause birth defects if either the
man or woman is using it at the time of conception.
Anyone who uses this drug and is sexually active
should consult with a physician about an effective
birth control method.
Other common side effects of antirheumatic drugs
include abdominal cramps, diarrhea, dizziness, loss of
appetite, headache, nausea, vomiting, fever and chills,
and mouth sores. A variety of other side effects may
occur. Anyone who has unusual symptoms while taking
antirheumatic drugs should notify the treating physician.
The gold compounds may cause serious blood
problems by reducing the ability of the blood forming
organs to produce blood cells. These drugs may
decrease the number of white blood cells, red blood
cells, or both. Patients taking these drugs should have
regular blood counts.
Entanercept (Enbrel) may also cause blood problems, and some patients who received this drug have
developed eye problems and multiple sclerosis. It is not
certain whether these reactions were caused by entanercept, but multiple sclerosis has been seen in patients taking other drugs which act against tumor necrosis factor.
Interactions
Antirheumatic drugs may interact with a variety of
other medicines or other antirheumatic drugs. When this
happens, the effects of one or both of the drugs may
change, or the risk of side effects may be greater. Anyone
who takes this type of drug should inform the prescribing
physician about any other medication he or she is taking.
Among the drugs that may interact with antirheumatic
drugs are phenytoin (Dilantin), aspirin, sulfa drugs such
as Bactrim and Gantrisin, tetracycline and some other
antibiotics and cimetidine (Tagamet). NSAIDs such as
ibuprofen (Motrin, Advil) are also known to interact
with other classes of antirheumatic drugs.