Definition
An aneurysm is an abnormal bulging or swelling
of a portion of a blood vessel. The aorta, which can
develop these abnormal bulges, is the large blood
vessel that carries oxygen-rich blood away from the
heart to the rest of the body.
Description
The aorta carries oxygen-rich blood to the body,
and is therefore called an artery. Because the aorta is an
artery, its walls are made of up three layers; a thin inner
layer, a muscular middle layer (that gives the vessel its
flexibility under pressure from the filling blood), and a
fiber-like outer layer that gives the vessel strength to not
burst when the heart pumps blood to the body.
Aortic aneurysms occur when a weakness develops in part of the wall of the aorta; three basic
types are usually found. If all three layers of the
vessel are affected and weakness develops along an
extended area of the vessel, the weakened area will
appear as a large, bulging region of blood vessel;
this is called a fusiform aneurysm. If weakness
develops between the inner and outer layers of the
aortic wall, a bulge results as blood from the interior of the vessel is pushed around the damaged
region in the wall and collects between these layers.
This is called a dissecting aneurysm because one
layer is ‘‘dissected’’ or separated from another. If
damage occurs to only the middle (muscular) layer
of the vessel, a sack-like bulge can form; therefore,
this is a saccular aneurysm.
Causes and symptoms
Aortic aneurysms occur in different portions of
the aorta, which begins in the chest (at the heart) and
travels downward through the abdomen. Aneurysms
found in the region of the aorta within the chest are
called thoracic aortic aneurysms. Aneurysms that
occur in the part of the aorta within the abdomen are
called abdominal aortic aneurysms.
Thoracic aortic aneurysms do not usually produce any noticeable symptoms. However, as the
aneurysm becomes larger, chest, shoulder, neck,
lower back, or abdominal pain can result.
Abdominal aortic aneurysms occur more often in
men, and these aneurysms can cause pain in the
lower back, hips, and abdomen. A painful abdominal aortic aneurysm usually means that the aneurysm
could burst very soon.
Most abdominal aortic aneurysms are caused by
atherosclerosis, a condition caused when fat (mostly
cholesterol) carried in the blood builds up in the inner
wall of the aorta. As more and more fat attaches to the
aortic wall, the wall itself becomes abnormally weak
and often results in an aneurysm or bulge.
Aortic aneurysms are also caused by a breakdown
of the muscular middle layer of the artery wall, by high
blood pressure, by direct injury to the chest, and
although rare, by bacteria that can infect the aorta.
Diagnosis
Silent, stable aneurysms are often detected when a
person has an x ray as part of a routine examination or
for other medical reasons. Otherwise, when chest,
abdominal, or back pain is severe, aortic aneurysm is
suspected and x-ray (radiographic) studies can confirm or rule out that condition.
Treatment
Aortic aneurysms are potentially life-threatening
conditions. Small aneurysms should be monitored for
their rate of growth and large aneurysms require consideration for a surgical repair. The most common
method of surgical repair is to cut out the bulging
section of artery wall and sew a Dacron fiber material
into its place in the vessel wall.
Prognosis
Only 1-2% of people die from having surgical
repair of an aortic aneurysm. However, if the aneurysm
is untreated and eventually ruptures, less than half of
the people with ruptured aneurysms will survive. The
challenge for the physician is to decide when or if to do
the preventive surgery.
Prevention
Aneuryms can develop in people with atherosclerosis. High blood pressure can also lead to this
condition. Although no definite prevention exists, lifestyle and dietary changes that help lower blood pressure and the amount of fat in the blood stream may
slow the development of aneurysms.