Definition
Appetite-enhancing drugs are a diverse group of
medications given to prevent undesired weight loss in
the elderly and in patients suffering from such diseases
as AIDS and cancer, which often result in wasting of
the body’s muscle tissue as well as overall weight loss.
The medical term for these drugs is orexigenic, which
is derived from the Greek word for ‘‘appetite’’ or
‘‘desire.’’ None of the orexigenic drugs in common
use as of 2005, however, were originally formulated
or prescribed as appetite stimulants; they range from
antihistamines and antiemetics (drugs given to treat or
prevent nausea and vomiting) to antidepressants and
synthetic hormones. The medications most often used
in the early 2000s include mirtazapine (Remeron), a
tetracyclic antidepressant; cyproheptadine (Periactin),
an antihistamine; dronabinol (Marinol, THC), an
antiemetic; nandrolone, oxymetholone, and oxandrolone (Anadrol-50, Durabolin, Hybolin, Oxandrin, and
other brand nam! es), which are anabolic steroids
related to the male sex hormone testosterone; and
megestrol acetate (Megace), a synthetic derivative of
the female sex hormone progesterone. In addition to
these prescription drugs, fish oil (eicosapentaenoic acid
or EPA) has been recommended as an alternative
or complementary treatment for undesired weight loss.
Purpose
The reader should note the distinction between
appetite and hunger in order to understand why a
group of such different medications could be used to
stimulate the desire for food. Hunger is defined as the
body’s basic physical need for food, whether in terms
of calorie content or specific nutrients. Appetite, on
the other hand, refers to the complex desires in
humans for food and drink that are often conditioned
or influenced by previous experiences or cultural factors as well as by a person’s present health status.
People may have an appetite for food in the absence of
hunger; conversely, they may be hungry in the physical
sense but have little or no appetite. Loss of appetite
may lead to a type of malnutrition known as undernutrition, which is characterized by food intake that
falls below a recommended daily allowance of calories
or by the body’s inability to make use of the nutrients
in the food that is consumed.
People may become anorexic (lose their appetite
for food) for a variety of physical, emotional, and
social reasons:
 Sensory changes related to aging. Elderly persons
often experience a partial loss of the senses of taste
and smell, which means that they may not enjoy their
meals as much as they did when they were younger.
In addition, many elderly persons feel full after eating relatively small amounts of food. It is thought
that this early feeling of fullness is caused by
increased secretion of gastric hormones known as
cholecystokinins.
 Gastrointestinal disorders. Patients with such disorders as Crohn’s disease or gastric atonia (abnormally
slow emptying of the stomach) may lose their appetite for food.
 Severe diseases that affect the entire body, particularly cancer and AIDS. Patients with these diseases
may develop cachexia, a potentially life-threatening
condition characterized by unintended weight loss
and wasting of lean muscle tissue. Cachexia is often
accompanied by loss of appetite.
 Medication side effects. In addition to the drugs used
in cancer chemotherapy, such drugs as fluoxetine
(Prozac), digoxin (Lanoxin), quinidine (Duraquin,
Cardioquin), hydralazine (Alazine, Apresoline), certain antibiotics, and vitamin A may cause loss of
appetite.
 Emotional stress. Many people do not feel like eating
before examinations, job interviews, public speaking,
artistic performances, athletic competitions, or similar stressful situations.
 Depression and other mood disorders. Loss of appetite is a common feature of depressive episodes as
well as of major depressive disorder.
 Cultural factors. The types of food that people find
appetizing are influenced by their respective cultures;
for example, Westerners usually find the use of cats
and dogs for food in China and Korea upsetting or
disgusting because they regard these animals as
domestic pets rather than dietary items. In addition,
many people lose their appetite when they discover
insects, hair, or other evidence of unsanitary
conditions in their food, or when they find that a
dish’s ingredients violate the dietary laws of their
religion.
 Social isolation. Research indicates that human
appetite for food is stimulated by eating in the company of others. Loss of appetite in many elderly
people is associated with living alone.
 Previous experience. People who have developed
food poisoning after eating contaminated or improperly refrigerated salads, raw clams or oysters, or
similar foods may develop a long-term distaste for
the food that made them sick.
Given the complexity and variety of factors that
influence the desire for food in humans, doctors often
use such questionnaires as the Mini Nutritional
Assessment or the Nutrition Screening Index before
prescribing any appetite-enhancing drug. Many
patients can be successfully treated by changes in the
type or dosage of medications they are taking for
other conditions, or by therapy directed at an underlying mood disorder or gastrointestinal disease.
Others can be helped by changes in their living situations that allow them to share mealtimes with others
or by assistance in preparing foods that they particularly enjoy. The American Academy of Home Care
Physicians (AAHCP) noted in a report published in
May 2004 that the use of orexigenic drugs in the
elderly is ‘‘controversial and not generally FDAapproved.’’
Description
Orexigenic drugs used in the United States as of
2005 are classified as follows:
 Mirtazapine. Mirtazapine is a tetracyclic antidepressant that was approved by the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) in 1996 for the treatment of
major depression. Although researchers do not fully
understand why mirtazapine relieves mood disorders, they think that it increases the levels of noradrenaline and serotonin (chemicals that transmit
nerve impulses across the gaps between cells) in the
brain. Mirtazapine is most often prescribed as an
appetite stimulant for patients who have been previously diagnosed with depression.
 Cyproheptadine. Cyproheptadine is an antihistamine given to relieve the symptoms of colds, nasal
allergies, and hay fever. It is also prescribed to relieve
the itching associated with insect bites and stings,
poison ivy, and poison oak. It appears to be most
effective in treating loss of appetite in children and
adults diagnosed with cystic fibrosis.
Dronabinol. Dronabinol is a synthetic version of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the mood-altering compound found in marijuana (Cannabis sativa).
Marijuana has been known as an appetite stimulant
for centuries, having been recommended for that purpose by Ayurvedic practitioners and by the Arabic
physician Al Badri, who first described its orexigenic
properties in 1251. Dronabinol is most commonly
used to treat the nausea and vomiting associated with
AIDS and with cancer chemotherapy.
 Anabolic steroids. These drugs are given to older persons to increase muscle mass and strength, or to help
patients recovering from severe illness or injury to
regain lost weight.
 Megestrol acetate. Megestrol acetate was first
approved by the FDA in 1976 for palliative treatment of metastatic breast or endometrial cancer. It
received additional approval in 1993 for the
treatment of anorexia or unexplained weight loss in
patients with AIDS. Researchers do not fully understand how the drug prevents the growth of cancer
cells or how it stimulates appetite.
 Fish oil. Fish oil is recommended by some practitioners as a nutritional supplement for weight loss
caused by cancer or AIDS. It is thought that the
omega-3 fatty acids in fish oil help to reduce the
inflammation associated with some forms of cancer
therapy as well as helping patients regain lost weight.
Although some studies question the effectiveness of
fish oil as a complementary treatment for undesired
weight loss, the National Center for Complementary
and Alternative Medicine (NCCAM) is recruiting
patients as of April 2005 for a clinical trial of fish
oil as a dietary supplement to maintain weight in
patients with pancreatic cancer. The study will be
completed in September 2007.
Recommended dosage
Recommended dosages for orexigenic drugs are
as follows:
 Mirtazapine. Mirtazapine is available in 15- and 30-
mg tablets or disintegrating tablets. The usual starting dose is 15 mg once daily, usually at bedtime. The
drug can be taken with or without food, as the
patient prefers.
 Cyproheptadine. Cyproheptadine is taken by mouth,
either as tablets or in liquid form. Adults are usually
given 4 mg three or four times per day. Children
between 2 and 6 years of age are usually given 12
mg per day in 3–4 divided doses while older children
are given 16 mg per day in divided doses.
 Dronabinol. As an appetite stimulant, dronabinol is
given as a 2.5-mg capsule twice a day, before lunch
and dinner. Some AIDS patients may be given as
much as 10 mg per day.
 Anabolic steroids. Oxandrolone and oxymetholone
are available in the United States and Canada as
tablets, while nandrolone is given by injection. To
build up body tissues after injury or serious illness,
the adult dosage of oxandrolone is a 2.5-mg tablet
taken by mouth two to four times daily for a period
of four weeks, although the total daily dosage may be
raised as high as 20 mg. To treat anemia, oxymetholone is prescribed according to the patient’s body
weight, usually 0.45–2.3 mg per pound of body
weight per day in adults and children. Nandrolone
is given by injection every three to four weeks for a
period of 12 weeks. The usual dosage for women and
girls over 14 is 50–100 mg; for men and boys over 14,50–200 mg; for children between the ages of 2 and 13,
15–50 mg.
 Megestrol acetate. Megestrol acetate is given as a
liquid suspension in 200-mg doses every 6 hours.
 Fish oil. A recommended dose for cancer-induced
weight loss is 12 g daily, taken by mouth. Fish oil is
available in capsules as well as liquid forms.
Precautions
Precautions for orexigenic drugs are as follows:
 Mirtazapine. In January 2005 the FDA required
labeling changes for mirtazapine to warn of the
increased risk of suicide or self-harm in children or
adolescents taking this drug. Mirtazapine should not
be given to children below 18 years of age, and
should be used with caution in pregnant or lactating
women. Patients taking mirtazapine should not stop
taking it without telling their doctor; it should not be
discontinued abruptly but taken in progressively
smaller doses over a period of time. This precaution
is particularly important in patients who have been
taking the drug for a long time.
 Cyproheptadine. This drug should not be given to
patients who suffer acute asthma attacks or are
hypersensitive to antihistamines. It should not be
given to patients who have taken phenelzine
(Nardil), tranylcypromine (Parnate), or other MAO
inhibitors within the last two weeks. Cyproheptadine
should be used cautiously in the elderly and in
patients with glaucoma, high blood pressure, or cardiovascular disease.
 Dronabinol. Patients taking dronabinol should
be closely supervised by their doctor, as the
drug may cause unpredictable changes in blood
pressure and heart rate. In addition, it may make
certain mental disorders worse. It also has a high
potential for abuse; for this reason, it should be
used cautiously in patients with a history of
alcohol or drug abuse. Dronabinol should not
be used by nursing mothers because it passes
into breast milk. It should be used with great
caution in children or patients diagnosed with
severe mental illness because of its effects on
the mind. Patients taking dronabinol should
notify their dentist or surgeon before any procedure requiring local or general anesthesia, as the
drug may intensify the effects of the anesthetic.
In addition, these patients should not drive a car
or operate dangerous machinery until they know
whether dronabinol makes them dizzy, drowsy,
or uncoordinated.
 Anabolic steroids. Patients taking these drugs must
follow a diet high in protein and calories in order to
benefit from the medications, and should be carefully
supervised by their doctor because of possible side
effects. Children or teenagers taking these drugs
should have x-rays every six months to make sure
they are growing normally, as anabolic steroids can
interfere with growth. Patients with diabetes should
check their blood sugar levels with extra care, as
these drugs may cause rapid changes in blood sugar
levels.
 Megestrol acetate. This drug should not be used by
pregnant or lactating women, or by women planning
to become pregnant. Women of childbearing age
who are taking megestrol should use a reliable form
of contraception.
 Fish oil. Fish oil is not a prescription drug; however,
patients who choose to take cod liver oil as their fish
oil supplement should make sure that they are not
getting more than the safe maximum daily allowances of vitamins A and D. These vitamins tend to build
up in the body and may reach toxic levels. The maximum safe daily level of vitamin A for adults is 3000
micrograms (mcg).
Side effects
Side effects reported for orexigenic drugs are as
follows:
 Mirtazapine. Mirtazapine may cause mood changes,
including worsening depression or thoughts of suicide. It may also cause panic attacks, irritability,
difficulty with impulse control, abnormal levels of
excitement, or difficulty sleeping. Physical side
effects may include sleepiness, dry mouth, constipation, nausea and vomiting, flu-like symptoms, chest
pain, and rapid heartbeat. Patients who have any of
these side effects should consult their doctor at once.
 Cyproheptadine. Side effects include drowsiness,
fatigue, dry mouth, skin rash, chest congestion, headache, diarrhea, nausea and vomiting, difficulty urinating, and blurred vision. Patients who experience
urinary or vision problems should consult their doctor at once.
 Dronabinol. Dronabinol may cause a variety of
changes in mental status, including delirium, confusion, hallucinations, memory loss, delusions, euphoria
(false sense of well-being), nervousness or anxiety.
Because of the possibility of severe mental side
effects, anyone who has taken an overdose of dronabinol needs immediate emergency medical help. The
drug may also cause clumsiness or lightheadedness
dry mouth, fatigue, headache, sweating, facial flushing, diarrhea or constipation, muscle pains, high
blood pressure, seizures, problems in urinating, red
eyes, or vomiting.
 Anabolic steroids. These drugs have been reported to
cause a rare form of liver disease; patients who notice
yellowing of the eyes or skin, or black, tarry stools,
sore throat and fever, vomiting of blood, or purplish
or reddish spots on the body should contact their
doctor at once. Other side effects include feeling
chilly, diarrhea, muscle cramps, unusual increase or
decrease in sexual desire, acne or oily skin, bone pain,
nausea, or vomiting. Women may notice deepening
of the voice, hair loss, unnatural hair growth (hirsutism), or irregular menstrual periods. Adult males
may notice enlargement of the breasts (gynecomastia), frequent need to urinate, or frequent erections.
Elderly males may have difficulty urinating.
 Megestrol acetate. Side effects of megestrol acetate
include swelling of the hands, feet, or lower legs;
headaches; sore breasts; or decreased sexual desire.
Men taking this drug may become impotent. Women
may notice vaginal bleeding or abdominal pain.
 Fish oil. Some people taking fish oil as a dietary
supplement experience an increased tendency to
burp followed by a fishy taste in the mouth.
Interactions
Most orexigenic drugs interact with a number of
other medications:
 Mirtazapine. Mirtazapine may cause high blood
pressure or abnormally high body temperature if
taken together with MAO inhibitors (furazolidone,
phenelzine, procarbazine, selegiline, or tranylcypromine). It intensifies the sedating (sleep-inducing)
effects of alcohol, benzodiazepine tranquilizers, antihistamines, tricyclic antidepressants, narcotic pain
relievers, and some medications given for high
blood pressure.
 Cyproheptadine. Cyproheptadine intensifies and
prolongs the effects of other antihistamines, alcohol,
barbiturates, narcotic pain relievers, benzodiazepine
tranquilizers, and antidepressant medications.
 Dronabinol. Dronabinol intensifies the effects of
alcohol and other medications that act as central
nervous system depressants. These groups of drugs
include barbiturates, benzodiazepine tranquilizers,
tetracyclic and tricyclic antidepressants, narcotic
pain relievers, antiseizure medications, antihistamines, muscle relaxants, and anesthetics, including
dental anesthetics.
 Anabolic steroids. Anabolic steroids may intensify
the effects of blood thinners (aspirin, coumadin, warfarin). They may increase the risk of liver damage in
patients who are taking phenothiazines, valproic
acid, oral contraceptives containing estrogen, gold
salts, methotrexate, carbamazepine, amiodarone,
mercaptopurine, phenytoin, plicamycin, disulfiram,
daunorubicin, chloroquine, methyldopa, or
naltrexone.
 Megestrol acetate. No significant interactions with
other drugs have been reported. Patients taking
megestrol acetate should, however, notify their physician of all other drugs and dietary supplements
(including herbal preparations) that they use on a
regular basis, as dosage adjustments are sometimes
needed.
 Fish oil. Fish oil has been reported to intensify the
effects of such blood-thinning medications as coumadin and warfarin. Persons who take these drugs
and wish to use fish oil as a dietary supplement
should consult their doctor first.