Definition
Appendectomy is the surgical removal of the
appendix. The appendix is a worm-shaped hollow
pouch attached to the cecum, the beginning of the
large intestine.
Purpose
Appendectomies are performed to treat appendicitis, an inflamed and infected appendix.
Precautions
Since appendicitis occurs most commonly in
males between the ages of 10-14 and in females
between the ages of 15-19, appendectomy is most
often performed during this time. The diagnosis of
appendicitis is most difficult in the very young (less
than two years of age) and in the elderly.
Description
Appendectomy is considered a major surgical
operation. Therefore, a general surgeon must perform
this operation in the operating room of a hospital. An
anesthesiologist is also present during the operation to
administer an anesthetic. Most often the anesthesiologist uses a general anesthetic technique whereby
patients are put to sleep and made pain free by
administering drugs in the vein or by agents inhaled
through a tube placed in the windpipe. Occasionally a
spinal anesthetic may be used.
After the patient is anesthetized, the general
surgeon can remove the appendix either by using
the traditional open procedure (in which a 2-3 in
[5-7.6 cm] incision is made in the abdomen) or via
laparoscopy (in which four 1 in [2.5cm] incisions are
made in the abdomen).
Traditional open appendectomy
When the surgeon uses the open approach, he
makes an incision in the lower right section of the
abdomen. Most incisions are less than 3 in (7.6 cm)
in length. The surgeon then identifies all of the organs
in the abdomen and examines them for other disease
or abnormalities. The appendix is located and brought
up into the wounds. The surgeon separates the appendix from all the surrounding tissue and its attachment
to the cecum and then removes it. The site where the
appendix was previously attached, the cecum, is closed
and returned to the abdomen. The muscle layers and
then the skin are sewn together.
Laproscopic appendectomy
When the surgeon conducts a laproscopic appendectomy, four incisions, each about 1 in (2.5 cm) in
length, are made. One incision is near the umbilicus, or
navel, and one is between the umbilicus and the pubis.
Two other incisions are smaller and are in the right
side of the lower abdomen. The surgeon then passes a
camera and special instruments through these incisions. With the aid of this equipment, the surgeon
visually examines the abdominal organs and identifies
the appendix. Similarly, the appendix is freed from
all of its attachments and removed. The place where
the appendix was formerly attached, the cecum, is
stitched. The appendix is removed through one of the
incisions. The instruments are removed and then all of
the incisions are closed.
Studies and opinions about the relative advantages and disadvantages of each method are divided.
A skilled surgeon can perform either one of these
procedures in less than one hour. However, laproscopic appendectomy (LA) always takes longer than
traditional appendectomy (TA). The increased time
required to do a LA increases the patient’s exposure
to anesthetics, which increases the risk of complications. The increased time requirement also escalates
fees charged by the hospital for operating room time
and by the anesthesiologist. Since LA also requires
specialized equipment, the fees for its use also
increases the hospital charges. Patients with either
operation have similar pain medication needs, begin
eating diets at comparable times, and stay in the hospital equivalent amounts of time. LA is of special
benefit in women in whom the diagnosis is difficult
and gynecological disease (such as endometriosis, pelvic inflammatory disease, ruptured ovarian follicles,
ruptured ovarian cysts, and tubal pregnancies) may be
the source of pain and not appendicitis. If LA is done
in these patients, the pelvic organs can be more thoroughly examined and a definitive diagnosis made prior
to removal of the appendix. Most surgeons select
either TA or LA based on the individual needs and
circumstances of the patient.
Insurance plans do cover the costs of appendectomy. Fees are charged independently by the hospital
and the physicians. Hospital charges include fees for
operating and recovery room use, diagnostic and
laboratory testing, as well as the normal hospital
room charges. Surgical fees vary from region to region
and range between $250-$750. The anesthesiologist’s
fee depends upon the health of the patient and the
length of the operation.
Preparation
Once the diagnosis of appendicitis is made and the
decision has been made to perform an appendectomy,
the patient undergoes the standard preparation for an
operation. This usually takes only one to two hours
and includes signing the operative consents, patient
identification procedures, evaluation by the anesthesiologist, and moving the patient to the operating suites
of the hospital. Occasionally, if the patient has been ill
for a prolonged period of time or has had protracted
vomiting, a delay of few to several hours may be necessary to give the patient fluids and antibiotics.
Aftercare
Recovery from an appendectomy is similar to
other operations. Patients are allowed to eat when
the stomach and intestines begin to function again.
Usually the first meal is a clear liquid diet–broth,
juice, soda pop, and gelatin. If patients tolerate this
meal, the next meal usually is a regular diet. Patients
are asked to walk and resume their normal physical
activities as soon as possible. If TA was done, work
and physical education classes may be restricted for a
full three weeks after the operation. If a LA was done,
most patients are able to return to work and strenuous
activity within one to three weeks after the operation.
Risks
Certain risks are present when any operation
requires a general anesthetic and the abdominal cavity
is opened. Pneumonia and collapse of the small airways (atelectasis) often occurs. Patients who smoke
are at a greater risk for developing these complications. Thrombophlebitis, or inflammation of the
veins, is rare but can occur if the patient requires
prolonged bed rest. Bleeding can occur but rarely is a
blood transfusion required. Adhesions (abnormal connections to abdominal organs by thin fibrous tissue) is
a known complication of any abdominal procedure
such as appendectomy. These adhesions can lead to
intestinal obstruction which prevents the normal flow
of intestinal contents. Hernia is a complication of any
incision, However, they are rarely seen after appendectomy because the abdominal wall is very strong in
the area of the standard appendectomy incision.
The overall complication rate of appendectomy
depends upon the status of the appendix at the time
it is removed. If the appendix has not ruptured the
complication rate is only about 3%. However, if the
appendix has ruptured the complication rate rises to
almost 59%. Wound infections do occur and are more
common if the appendicitis was severe, far advanced,
or ruptured. An abscess may form in the abdomen as a
complication of appendicitis.
Occasionally, an appendix will rupture prior to its
removal, spilling its contents into the abdominal cavity.
Peritonitis or a generalized infection in the abdomen
will occur. Treatment of peritonitis as a result of a
ruptured appendix includes removal of what remains
of the appendix, insertion of drains (rubber tubes that
promote the flow of infection inside the abdomen to outside of the body), and antibiotics. Fistula formation
(an abnormal connection between the cecum and the
skin) rarely occurs. It is only seen if the appendix has a
broad attachment to the cecum and the appendicitis is
far advanced causing destruction of the cecum itself.
Normal results
Most patients feel better immediately after an
operation for appendicitis. Many patients are discharged from the hospital within 24 hours after the
appendectomy. Others may require a longer stay–
three to five days. Almost all patients are back to
their normal activities within three weeks.
The mortality rate of appendicitis has dramatically
decreased over time. Currently, the mortality rate is
estimated at one to two per 1,000,000 cases of appendicitis. Death is usually due to peritonitis, intra abdominal abscess or severe infection following rupture.
The complications associated with undiagnosed,
misdiagnosised, or delayed diagnosis of appendectomy are very significant. The diagnosis is of appendicitis is difficult and never certain. This has led surgeons
to perform an appendectomy any time that they feel
appendicitis is the diagnosis. Most surgeons feel that
in approximately 20% of their patients, a normal
appendix will be removed. Rates much lower than
this would seem to indicate that the diagnosis of
appendicitis was being frequently missed.