Definition
An arrhythmia is an abnormality in the heart’s
rhythm, or heartbeat pattern. The heartbeat can be
too slow, too fast, have extra beats, skip a beat, or
otherwise beat irregularly.
Description
Arrhythmias are deviations from the normal
cadence of the heartbeat, which cause the heart to
pump improperly. The normal heartbeat starts in the
right atrium, where the heart’s natural pacemaker (the
sinus node) sends an electrical signal to the center of
the heart to the atrioventricular node. The atrioventricular node then sends signals into the main pumping
chamber to make the ventricle contract. Arrhythmias
occur when the heartbeat starts in a part of the heart
other than the sinus node, an abnormal rate or rhythm
develops in the sinus node, or a heart conduction
‘‘block’’ prevents the electrical signal from traveling
down the normal pathway.
More than four million Americans have arrhythmias, most of which are harmless. Middle-aged
adults commonly experience arrhythmias. As people
age, the probability of experiencing an arrhythmia
increases. Arrhythmias often occur in people who
do not have heart disease. In people with heart disease, it is usually the heart disease which is dangerous, not the arrhythmia. Arrhythmias often occur
during and after heart attacks. Some types of
arrhythmias, such as ventricular tachycardia, are
serious and even life threatening. In the United
States, arrhythmias are the primary cause of sudden
cardiac death, accounting for more than 350,000
deaths each year.
Slow heart rates (less than 60 beats per minute) are
called bradycardias, while fast heart rates (more than
100 beats per minute) are called tachycardias.
Bradycardia can result in poor circulation of blood,
and, hence, a lack of oxygen throughout the body,
especially the brain. Tachycardias also can compromise the heart’s ability to pump effectively because the
ventricles do not have enough time to completely fill.
Arrhythmias are characterized by their site of
origin: the atria or the ventricles. Supraventricular
arrhythmias occur in the upper areas of the heart and
are less serious than ventricular arrhythmias.
Ventricular fibrillation is the most serious arrhythmia
and is fatal unless medical help is immediate.
Causes and symptoms
In many cases, the cause of an arrhythmia is
unknown. Known causes of arrhythmias include
heart disease, stress, caffeine, tobacco, alcohol, diet
pills, and decongestants in cough and cold medicines.
Symptoms of an arrhythmia include a fast heartbeat, pounding or fluttering chest sensations, skipping
a heartbeat, ‘‘flip-flops,’’ dizziness, faintness, shortness
of breath, and chest pains.
Diagnosis
Examination with a stethoscope, electrocardiograms, and electrophysiologic studies is used to diagnose arrhythmias. Sometimes arrhythmias can be
identified by listening to the patient’s heart through
a stethoscope, but, since arrhythmias are not always
present, they may not occur during the physical
exam.An electrocardiogram (ECG) shows the heart’s
activity and may reveal a lack of oxygen from poor
circulation (ischemia). Electrodes covered with conducting jelly are placed on the patient’s chest, arms,
and legs. They send impulses of the heart’s activity
through an electrical activity monitor (oscilloscope)
to a recorder that traces them on paper. The test
takes about 10 minutes and is performed in a physician’s office. Another type of ECG, commonly known
as the exercise stress test, measures how the heart and
blood vessels respond to exertion while the patient is
exercising on a treadmill or a stationary bike. This test
is performed in a physician’s office or an exercise
laboratory and takes 15-30 minutes. Other types of
ECGs include 24-hour ECG monitoring and transtelephonic monitoring. In 24-hour ECG (Holter)
monitoring, the patient wears a small, portable tape
recorder connected to disks on his/her chest that
record the heart’s rhythm during daily activities.
Transtelephonic monitoring can identify arrhythmias
that occur infrequently. Similar to Holter monitoring,
transtelephonic monitoring can continue for days or
weeks, and it enables patients to send the ECG via
telephone to a monitoring station when an arrhythmia
is felt, or the patient can store the information in the
recorder and transmit it later.
Electrophysiologic studies are invasive procedures performed in a hospital to identify the origin of
serious arrhythmias and responses to various treatments. They involve cardiac catheterization, in which
catheters tipped with electrodes are passed from a vein
in the arm or leg through the blood vessels into the
heart. The electrodes record impulses in the heart,
highlighting where the arrhythmia starts. During the
procedure, physicians can test the effects of various
drugs by provoking an arrhythmia through the electrodes and trying different drugs. The procedure takes
one to three hours, during which the patient is awake
but mildly sedated. Local anesthetic is injected at the
catheter insertion sites.
Treatment
Many arrhythmias do not require any treatment.
For serious arrhythmias, treating the underlying heart
disease sometimes controls the arrhythmia. In some
cases, the arrhythmia itself is treated with drugs, electrical shock (cardioversion), automatic implantable
defibrillators, artificial pacemakers, catheter ablation,
or surgery. Supraventricular arrhythmias often can be
treated with drug therapy. Ventricular arrhythmias
are more complex to treat.
Drug therapy can manage many arrhythmias, but
finding the right drug and dose requires care and can
take some time. Common drugs for suppressing
arrhythmias include beta-blockers, calcium channel
blockers, quinidine, digitalis preparations, and procainamide. Because of their potential serious side effects,
stronger, desensitizing drugs are used only to treat lifethreatening arrhythmias. All of the drugs used to treat
arrhythmias have possible side effects, ranging from
mild complications with beta-blockers and calcium
channel blockers to more serious effects of desensitizing drugs that can, paradoxically, cause arrhythmias
or make them worse. Response to drugs is usually
measured by ECG, Holter monitor, or electrophysiologic study.
In emergency situations, cardioversion or defibrillation (the application of an electrical shock to the
chest wall) is used. Cardioversion restores the heart
to its normal rhythm. It is followed by drug therapy to
prevent recurrence of the arrhythmia.
Artificial pacemakers that send electrical signals
to make the heart beat properly can be implanted
under the skin during a simple operation. Leads from
the pacemaker are anchored to the right side of the
heart. Pacemakers are used to correct bradycardia and
are sometimes used after surgical or catheter ablation.
Automatic implantable defibrillators correct lifethreatening ventricular arrhythmias by recognizing
them and then restoring a normal heart rhythm by
pacing the heart or giving it an electric shock. They
are implanted within the chest wall without major
surgery and store information for future evaluation
by physicians. Automatic implantable defibrillators
have proven to be more effective in saving lives than
drugs alone. They often are used in conjunction with
drug therapy.
Ablation, a procedure to alter or remove the
heart tissue causing the arrhythmia in order to prevent a recurrence, can be performed through a catheter or surgery. Supraventricular tachycardia can be
treated successfully with ablation. Catheter ablation
is performed in a catheterization laboratory with the
patient under sedation. A catheter equipped with a
device that maps the heart’s electrical pathways is
inserted into a vein and is threaded into the heart.
High-frequency radio waves are then used to remove
the pathway(s) causing the arrhythmia. Surgical
ablation is similar in principle but it is performed in
a hospital, using a cold probe instead of radio waves
to destroy tissue. Ablation treatments are used when
medications fail.
Maze surgery treats atrial fibrillation by making
multiple incisions through the atrium to allow electrical impulses to move effectively. This is often
recommended for patients who have not responded to
drugs or cardioversion.
Alternative treatment
Since some arrhythmias can be life threatening, a
conventional medical doctor should always be consulted first. Acupuncture can correct an insignificant
number (1.5%) of atrial fibrillation cases. For new,
minor arrhythmias, acupuncture may be effective in
up to 70% of cases, but this figure may not differ
much from placebo therapy. Both western and
Chinese herbal remedies are also used in the treatment of arrhythmias. Since hawthorn (Crataegus laevigata) dilates the blood vessels and stimulates the
heart muscle, it may help to stabilize arrhythmias. It
is gentle and appropriate for home use, unlike foxglove (Digitalis purpurea), an herb whose action on
the heart is too potent for use without supervision by
a qualified practitioner. Homeopathic practitioners
may prescribe remedies such as Lachesis and aconite
or monkshood (Aconitum napellus) to treat mild
arrhythmias.
Prognosis
Advances in diagnostic techniques, new drugs,
and medical technology have extended the lives of
many patients with serious arrhythmias. Diagnostic
techniques enable physicians to accurately identify
arrhythmias, while new drugs, advances in pacemaker
technology, the development of implantable defibrillators, and progress in ablative techniques offer effective treatments for many types of arrhythmia.
Prevention
Some arrhythmias can be prevented by managing
stress, controlling anxiety, and avoiding caffeine, alcohol, decongestants, cocaine, and cigarettes.