Definition
Art therapy, sometimes called creative arts therapy or expressive arts therapy, encourages people to
express and understand emotions through artistic
expression and through the creative process.
Purpose
Art therapy provides the client-artist with critical
insight into emotions, thoughts, and feelings. Key
benefits of the art therapy process include:
 Self-discovery. At its most successful, art therapy
triggers an emotional catharsis.
 Personal fulfillment. The creation of a tangible
reward can build confidence and nurture feelings of
self-worth. Personal fulfillment comes from both the
creative and the analytical components of the artistic
process.
 Empowerment. Art therapy can help people visually
express emotions and fears that they cannot express
through conventional means, and can give them
some sense of control over these feelings.
 Relaxation and stress relief. Chronic stress can be
harmful to both mind and body. Stress can weaken
and damage the immune system, can cause insomnia
and depression, and can trigger circulatory problems
(like high blood pressure and irregular heartbeats).
When used alone or in combination with other
relaxation techniques such as guided imagery, art
therapy can effectively relieve stress.
 Symptom relief and physical rehabilitation. Art therapy can also help patients cope with pain. This
therapy can promote physiological healing when
patients identify and work through anger, resentment, and other emotional stressors. It is often
prescribed to accompany pain control therapy for
chronically and terminally ill patients.
Description
Origins
Humans have expressed themselves with symbols
throughout history. Masks, ritual pottery, costumes,
other objects used in rituals, cave drawings, Egyptian
hieroglyphics, and Celtic art and symbols are all visual
records of self-expression and communication
through art. Art has also been associated spiritual
power, and artistic forms such as the Hindu and Buddhist mandala and Native American sand painting are considered powerful healing tools.
In the late nineteenth century, French psychiatrists Ambrose Tardieu and Paul-Max Simon both
published studies on the similar characteristics of and
symbolism in the artwork of the mentally ill. Tardieu
and Simon viewed art therapy as an effective diagnostic tool to identify specific types of mental illness or
traumatic events. Later, psychologists would use this
diagnostic aspect to develop psychological drawing
tests (the Draw-A-Man test, the Draw-A-Person
Questionnaire [DAP.Q]) and projective personality
tests involving visual symbol recognition (e.g., the
Rorschach Inkblot Test, the Thematic Apperception
Test [TAT], and the Holtzman Inkblot Test [HIT]).
The growing popularity of milieu therapies at
psychiatric institutions in the twentieth century was
an important factor in the development of art therapy
in the United States. Milieu therapies (or environmental therapy) focus on putting the patient in a controlled
therapeutic social setting that provides the patient
with opportunities to gain self-confidence and interact
with peers in a positive way. Activities that encourage
self-discovery and empowerment such as art, music,
dance, and writing are important components of this
approach.
Educator and therapist Margaret Naumburg was
a follower of both Freud and Jung, and incorporated
art into psychotherapy as a means for her patients to
visualize and recognize the unconscious. She founded
the Walden School in 1915, where she used students’
artworks in psychological counseling. She published
extensively on the subject and taught seminars on the
technique at New York University in the 1950s.
Today, she is considered the founder of art therapy
in the United States.
In the 1930s, Karl,William, and CharlesMenninger
introduced an art therapy program at their Kansasbased psychiatric hospital, the Menninger Clinic. The
Menninger Clinic employed a number of artists in residence in the following years, and the facility was also
considered a leader in the art therapy movement
through the 1950s and 60s. Other noted art therapy
pioneers who emerged in the 50s and 60s include Edith
Kramer, Hanna Yaxa Kwiatkowska (National Institute
of Mental Health), and Janie Rhyne.
Art therapy, sometimes called expressive art or art
psychology, encourages self-discovery and emotional
growth. It is a two part process, involving both the
creation of art and the discovery of its meaning.
Rooted in Freud and Jung’s theories of the subconscious and unconscious, art therapy is based on the
assumption that visual symbols and images are the
most accessible and natural form of communication
to the human experience. Patients are encouraged to
visualize, and then create, the thoughts and emotions
that they cannot talk about. The resulting artwork is
then reviewed and its meaning interpreted by the
patient.
The ‘‘analysis’’ of the artwork produced in art
therapy typically allows patients to gain some level of
insight into their feelings and lets them to work
through these issues in a constructive manner. Art
therapy is typically practiced with individual, group,
or family psychotherapy (talk therapy). While a therapist may provide critical guidance for these activities, a
key feature of effective art therapy is that the patient/
artist, not the therapist, directs the interpretation of
the artwork.
Art therapy can be a particularly useful treatment
tool for children, who frequently have limited language skills. By drawing or using other visual means
to express troublesome feelings, younger patients
can begin to address these issues, even if they cannot
identify or label these emotions with words. Art
therapy is also valuable for adolescents and adults
who are unable or unwilling to talk about thoughts
and feelings.
Beyond its use in mental health treatment, art
therapy is also used with traditional medicine to
treat organic diseases and conditions. The connection between mental and physical health is well
documented, and art therapy can promote healing
by relieving stress and allowing the patient to
develop coping skills.
Art therapy has traditionally centered on visual
mediums, like paintings, sculptures, and drawings.
Some mental healthcare providers have now
broadened the definition to include music, film, dance,
writing, and other types of artistic expression.
Art therapy is often one part of a psychiatric
inpatient or outpatient treatment program, and can
take place in individual or group therapy sessions.
Group art therapy sessions often take place in
hospital, clinic, shelter, and community program
settings. These group therapy sessions can have
the added benefits of positive social interaction,
empathy, and support from peers. The client-artist
can learn that others have similar concerns and
issues.
Preparations
Before starting art therapy, the therapist may
have an introductory session with the client-artist to
discuss art therapy techniques and give the client the
opportunity to ask questions about the process. The
client-artist’s comfort with the artistic process is critical to successful art therapy.
The therapist ensures that appropriate materials
and space are available for the client-artist, as well as
an adequate amount of time for the session. If the
individual artist is exploring art as therapy without
the guidance of a trained therapist, adequate materials, space, and time are still important factors in a
successful creative experience.
The supplies used in art therapy are limited only
by the artist’s (and/or therapist’s) imagination. Some
of the materials often used include paper, canvas,
poster board, assorted paints, inks, markers, pencils,
charcoals, chalks, fabrics, string, adhesives, clay,
wood, glazes, wire, bendable metals, and natural
items (like shells, leaves, etc.). Providing artists with
a variety of materials in assorted colors and textures
can enhance their interest in the process and may
result in a richer, more diverse exploration of their
emotions in the resulting artwork. Appropriate tools
such as scissors, brushes, erasers, easels, supply trays,
glue guns, smocks or aprons, and cleaning materials
are also essential.
An appropriate workspace should be available for
the creation of art. Ideally, this should be a bright,
quiet, comfortable place, with large tables, counters,
or other suitable surfaces. The space can be as simple
as a kitchen or office table, or as fancy as a specialized
artist’s studio.
The artist should have adequate time to become
comfortable with and explore the creative process.
This is especially true for people who do not consider
themselves ‘‘artists’’ and may be uncomfortable with
the concept. If performed in a therapy group or oneon-one session, the art therapist should be available to
answer general questions about materials and/or the
creative process. However, the therapist should be
careful not to influence the creation or interpretation
of the work.
Precautions
Art materials and techniques should match the
age and ability of the client. People with impairments,
such as traumatic brain injury or an organic neurological condition, may have difficulties with the selfdiscovery portion of the art therapy process depending
on their level of functioning. However, they may still
benefit from art therapy through the sensory stimulation it provides and the pleasure they get from artistic
creation.
While art is accessible to all (with or without a
therapist to guide the process), it may be difficult to
tap the full potential of the interpretive part of art
therapy without a therapist to guide the process.
When art therapy is chosen as a therapeutic tool
to cope with a physical condition, it should be
treated as a supplemental therapy and not as a
substitute for conventional medical treatments.
Research and general acceptance
A wide body of literature supports the use of art
therapy in a mental health capacity. And as the mindbody connection between psychological well-being
and physical health is further documented by studies
in the field, art therapy gains greater acceptance by
mainstream medicine as a therapeutic technique for
organic illness.