Definition
An arteriovenous fistula is an abnormal channel
or passage between an artery and a vein.
Description
An arteriovenous fistula is a disruption of the normal blood flow pattern. Normally, oxygenated blood
flows to the tissue through arteries and capillaries.
Following the release of oxygen in the tissues, the
blood returns to the heart in veins. An arteriovenous
fistula is an abnormal connection of an artery and a
vein. The blood bypasses the capillaries and tissues, and
returns to the heart. Arterial blood has a higher blood
pressure than veins and causes swelling of veins
involved in a fistula. Although both the artery and the
vein retain their normal connections, the new opening
between the two will cause some arterial blood to shunt
into the vein because of the blood pressure difference.
Causes and symptoms
There are two types of arteriovenous fistulas, congenital and acquired. A congenital arteriovenous fistula is one that formed during fetal development. It is a
birth defect. In congenital fistulas, blood vessels of the
lower extremity are more frequently involved than
other areas of the body. Congenital fistulas are not
common. An acquired arteriovenous fistula is one that
develops after a person is born. It usually occurs when
an artery and vein that are side-by-side are damaged
and the healing process results in the two becoming
linked. After catheterizations, arteriovenous fistulas
may occur as a complication of the arterial puncture
in the leg or arm. Fistulas also form without apparent
cause. In the case of patients on hemodialysis, physicians perform surgery to create a fistula. These
patients receive many needle sticks to flush their
blood through dialysis machines and for routine
blood analysis testing. The veins used may scar and
become difficult to use. Surgery is used to connect an
artery and vein so that arterial blood pressure and flow
rate widens the vein and decreases the chance of blood
clots forming inside the vein.
The main symptoms of arteriovenous fistulas near
the surface of the skin are bulging and discolored
veins. In some cases, the bulging veins can be mistaken
for varicose veins. Other fistulas can cause more serious problems depending on their location and the
blood vessels involved.
Diagnosis
Using a stethoscope, a physician can detect the
sound of a pulse in the affected vein (bruit). The sound
is a distinctive to-and-fro sound. Dye into the blood can
be tracked by x ray to confirm the presence of a fistula.
Treatment
Small arteriovenous fistulas can be corrected by
surgery. Fistulas in the brain or eye are very difficult to
treat. If surgery is not possible or very difficult, injection therapy may be used. Injection therapy is the injection of substances that cause the blood to clot at
the site of the injection. In the case of an arteriovenous
fistula, the blood clot should stop the passage of blood
from the artery to the vein. Surgery is usually used to
correct acquired fistulas once they are diagnosed.