Definition
Arteriovenous malformations are blood vessel
defects that occur before birth when the fetus is growing in the uterus (prenatal development). The blood
vessels appear as a tangled mass of arteries and veins.
They do not possess the capillary (very fine blood
vessels) bed which normally exists in the common
area where the arteries and veins lie in close proximity
(artery-vein interface). An arteriovenous malformation (AVM) may hemorrhage, or bleed, leading to
serious complications that can be life-threatening.
Description
AVMs represent an abnormal interface between
arteries and veins. Normally, arteries carry oxygenated blood to the body’s tissues through progressively smaller blood vessels. The smallest are
capillaries, which form a web of blood vessels (the
capillary bed) through the body’s tissues. The arterial
blood moves through tissues by these tiny pathways,
exchanging its load of oxygen and nutrients for carbon
dioxide and other waste products produced by the
body cells (cellular wastes). The blood is carried
away by progressively larger blood vessels, the veins.
AVMs lack a capillary bed and arterial blood is moved
(shunted) directly from the arteries into the veins.
AVMs can occur anywhere in the body and have
been found in the arms, hands, legs, feet, lungs, heart,
liver, and kidneys. However, 50% of these malformations are located in the brain, brainstem, and spinal
cord. Owing to the possibility of hemorrhaging, such
AVMs carry the risk of stroke, paralysis, and the loss
of speech, memory, or vision. An AVM that hemorrhages can be fatal.
Approximately three of every 100,000 people have
a cerebral AVM and roughly 40-80% of them will
experience some bleeding from the abnormal blood
vessels at some point. The annual risk of an AVM
bleeding is estimated at about 1-4%. After age 55, the
risk of bleeding decreases. Pre-existing high blood pressure or intense physical activity do not seem to be
associated with AVM hemorrhage, but pregnancy and
labor could cause a rupture or breaking open of a blood
vessel. An AVM hemorrhage is not as dangerous as an
aneurysmal rupture. (An aneurysm is a swollen, blood
filled vessel where the pressure of the blood causes the
wall to bulge outward.) There is an approximate 10%
fatality rate associated with AVM hemorrhage, compared to a 50% fatality rate for ruptured aneurysms.
Although AVMs are congenital defects, meaning
a person is born with them, they are rarely discovered
before age 20. A genetic link has been proposed for
some AVMs, but studies are only suggestive, not positive. The majority of AVMs are discovered in people
age 20-40. Medical researchers estimate that the malformations are created during days 45-60 of fetal
development. A second theory suggests that AVMs
are primitive structures that are left over from the period when fetal blood circulating systems began to
develop.
However they form, AVMs have blood vessels
that are abnormally fragile. The arteries that feed
into the malformation are unusually swollen and thin
walled. They lack the usual amount of smooth muscle
tissue and elastin, a fibrous connective tissue. These
blood vessels commonly accumulate deposits of calcium salts and hyalin. The venous part of the malformation receives blood directly from the artery.
Without the intervening capillary bed, the veins
receive blood at a higher pressure than they were
designed to handle. This part of the malformation is
also swollen (dilated) and thin walled. There is a measurable risk of an aneurysm forming near an AVM,
increasing the threat of hemorrhage, brain damage,
and death. Approximately 10-15% of AVMs are
accompanied by saccular aneurysms, a type of aneurysm that looks like a small sac attached to the outer
wall of the blood vessel.
Although the malformation itself lacks capillaries,
there is often an abnormal proliferation of capillaries
next to the defect. These blood vessels feed into the
malformation, causing it to grow larger in some cases.
As the AVM receives more blood through this ‘‘steal,’’
adjacent brain tissue does not receive enough. These
areas show abnormal nerve cell growth, cell death,
and deposits of calcium in that area (calcification).
Nerve cells within the malformation may demonstrate abnormal growth and are believed to be
nonfunctional.
Causes and symptoms
Most people do not realize that they have an
AVM unless it hemorrhages enough to produce symptoms. Small AVMs are more likely to hemorrhage. If a
hemorrhage occurs, it produces a sudden, severe headache. The headache may be focused in one specific
area or it may be more general. It can be mistaken
for a migraine in some cases. The headache is accompanied by other symptoms, such as vomiting, a stiff
neck, sleepiness, lethargy, confusion, irritability, or
weakness anywhere in the body. Seizures occur in
about a quarter of AVM cases. A person may experience decreased, double, or blurred vision.
Hemorrhaging from an AVM is generally less dangerous than hemorrhaging from an aneurysm, with a
survival rate of 80-90%.
Other symptoms occur less frequently, but sometimes appear alongside major symptoms such as the
sudden severe headache. Additional warning signs of a
bleeding AVM are impaired speech or smell, fainting,
facial paralysis, a drooping eyelid, dizziness, and ringing or buzzing in the ears.
Although large AVMs are less likely to hemorrhage, they can induce symptoms based on their mass
alone. Large AVMs exert pressure against brain tissue,
cause abnormal development in the surrounding brain
tissue, and slow down or block blood flow.
Hydrocephalus, a swelling of brain tissue caused by
accumulated fluids, may develop. The warning signs
associated with a large non-bleeding AVM are similar
to the symptoms of a small malformation that is bleeding. Unexplained headaches, seizures, dizziness, and
neurological symptoms, such as sensory changes, are
signals that demand medical attention.
Diagnosis
Based on the clinical symptoms such as severe
headache and neurological problems, and after a complete neurologic exam, a computed tomography scan
(CT) of the head will be done. In some cases, a
whooshing sound from arteries in the neck or over
the eye or jaw (called a bruit), can be heard with a
stethoscope. The CT scan will reveal whether there has
been bleeding in the brain and can identify AVMs
larger than 1 inch (2.5 cm). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is also used to identify an AVM. A lumbar
puncture, or spinal tap, may follow the MRI or CT
scan. A lumbar puncture involves removing a small
amount of cerebrospinal fluid from the lower part of
the spine. Blood cells or blood breakdown products in
the cerebrospinal fluid indicate bleeding.
To pinpoint where the blood is coming from, a
cerebral angiography is done. This procedure uses
x rays to map out the blood vessels in the brain,
including the vessels that feed into the malformation.
The information gained from angiography complements the MRI and helps distinguish the precise
location of the AVM.
Treatment
Neurosurgeons consider several factors before
deciding on a treatment option. There is some debate
over whether or not to treat AVMs that have not
ruptured and are not causing any symptoms. The
risks and benefits of proceeding with treatment need
to be measured on an individual basis, taking into
account factors such as the person’s age and general
health, as well as the AVM’s size and location. Several
treatment options are available, both for symptomatic
or asymptomatic AVMs. These treatment options
may be used alone or in combination.
Surgery
Removing the AVM is the surest way of preventing
it from causing future problems. Both small and large
AVMs can be handled in surgery. Surgery is recommended for superficial AVMs, but may be too dangerous for deep or very large AVMs. Unless it is
an emergency situation, an AVM that has hemorrhaged
is treated conservatively for several weeks. Conservative
treatment consists of managing the immediate symptoms and allowing the patient’s condition to stabilize.
Surgery requires general anesthesia and a longer period
of recuperation than any other treatment option.
Radiation
Radiation is particularly useful to treat small
(under 1 in) malformations that are deep within the
brain. Ionizing radiation is directed at the malformation, destroying the AVM without damaging the surrounding tissue. Radiation treatment is accomplished
in a single session and it is not necessary to open the
skull. However, success can only be measured over
the course of the following two years. A year after
the procedure, 50-75% of treated AVMs are completely blocked; two years after radiation treatment, the
percentage increases to 85-95%.
Embolization
Embolization involves plugging up access to the
malformation. This technique does not require opening the skull to expose the brain and can be used to
treat deep AVMs. Using x-ray images as a guide, a
catheter is threaded through the artery in the thigh
(femoral artery) to the affected area. The patient
remains awake during the procedure and medications
can be administered to prevent discomfort. The blood
vessel leading into the AVM is assessed for its importance to the rest of the brain before a balloon or other
blocking agent is inserted via the catheter. The block
chokes off the blood supply to the malformation.
There may be a mild headache or nausea associated
with the procedure, but patients may resume normal
activities after leaving the hospital. At least two to
three embolization procedures are usually necessary
at intervals of two to six weeks. At least a three-day
hospital stay is associated with each embolization.
Prognosis
Approximately 10% of AVM cases are fatal.
Seizures and neurological changes may be permanent
in another 10-30% cases of AVM rupture. If an AVM
bleeds once, it is about 20% likely to bleed again in the
next year. As time passes from the initial hemorrhage,
the risk for further bleeding drops to about 3-4%. If
the AVM has not bled, it is possible, but not guaranteed, that it never will. Untreated AVMs can grow
larger over time and rarely go away by themselves.
Once an AVM is removed and a person has recovered
from the procedure, there should be no further symptoms associated with that malformation.