Definition
Arthroplasty is surgery to relieve pain and restore
range of motion by realigning or reconstructing a joint.
Purpose
The goal of arthroplasty is to restore the function
of a stiffened joint and relieve pain. Two types of
arthroplastic surgery exist. Joint resection involves
removing a portion of the bone from a stiffened
joint, creating a gap between the bone and the socket,
to improve the range of motion. Scar tissue eventually
fills the gap. Pain is relieved and motion is restored,
but the joint is less stable.
Interpositional reconstruction is surgery to
reshape the joint and add a prosthetic disk between
the two bones forming the joint. The prosthesis can
be made of plastic and metal or from body tissue
such as fascia and skin. When interpositional
reconstruction fails, total joint replacement may be
necessary. Joint replacement is also called total
joint arthroplasty.
In recent years, joint replacement has become the
operation of choice for most knee and hip problems.
Elbow, shoulder, ankle, and finger joints are more
likely to be treated with joint resection or interpositional reconstruction.
Arthroplasty is performed on people suffering
from severe pain and disabling joint stiffness that
result from osteoarthritis or rheumatoid arthritis.
Joint resection, rather than joint replacement, is
more likely to be performed on people with rheumatoid arthritis, especially when the elbow joint is
involved. Total joint replacement is usually reserved
for people over the age of 60.
Precautions
If both the bone and socket of a joint are
damaged, joint replacement is usually the preferred
treatment.
Description
Arthroplasty is performed under general or regional anesthesia in a hospital, by an orthopedic surgeon.
Certain medical centers specialize in joint surgery and
tend to have higher success rates than less specialized
centers.
In joint resection, the surgeon makes an incision
at the joint, then carefully removes minimum amount
of bone necessary to allow free motion. The more bone
that remains, the more stable the joint. Ligament
attachments are preserved as much as possible. In
interpositional reconstruction, both bones of the
joint are reshaped, and a disk of material is placed
between the bones to prevent their rubbing together.
Length of hospital stay depends on which joint is
treated, but is normally only a few days.
Preparation
Prior to arthroplasty, all the standard preoperative blood and urine tests are performed. The patient
meets with the anesthesiologist to discuss any
special conditions that affect the administration of
anesthesia.
Aftercare
Patients who have undergone arthroplasty must
be careful not to over stress or destabilize the joint.
Physical therapy is begun immediately. Antibiotics are
given to prevent infection.
Risks
Joint resection and interpositional reconstruction
do not always produce successful results, especially in
patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Repeat surgery or
total joint replacement may be necessary. As with any
major surgery, there is always a risk of an allergic
reaction to anesthesia or that blood clots will break
loose and obstruct the arteries.
Normal results
Most patients recover with improved range of
motion in the joint and relief from pain.