Definition
Arthrograpy is a procedure involving multiple
x rays of a joint using a fluoroscope, or a special
piece of x-ray equipment which shows an immediate
x-ray image. A contrast medium (in this case, a contrast iodine solution) injected into the joint area helps
highlight structures of the joint.
Purpose
Frequently, arthrography is ordered to determine
the cause of unexplained joint pain. This fluoroscopic
procedure can show the internal workings of specific
joints and outline soft tissue structures. The procedure
may also be conducted to identify problems with the
ligaments, cartilage, tendons, or the joint capsule of
the hip, shoulder, knee, ankle or wrist. An arthrography procedure may locate cysts in the joint area, evaluate problems with the joint’s arrangement and
function, or indicate the need for joint replacement
(prostheses). The most commonly studied joints are
the knee and shoulder.
Precautions
Patients who are pregnant or may be pregnant
should not have this procedure unless the benefits of
the findings outweigh the risk of radiation exposure.
Patients who are known to be allergic to iodine need to
discuss this complication with their physician. Patients
who have a known allergy to shellfish are more likely
to be allergic to iodine contrast.
Description
Arthrograpy may be referred to as ‘‘joint radiography’’ or ‘‘x rays of the joint.’’ The term arthrogram
may be used interchangeably with arthrography. The
joint area will be cleaned and a local anesthetic
will be injected into the tissues around the joint
to reduce pain. Next, if fluids are present in the
joint, the physician may suction them out (aspirate) with a needle. These fluids may be sent to a
laboratory for further study. Contrast agents are
then injected into the joint through the same location by attaching the aspirating needle to a syringe
containing the contrast medium. The purpose of
contrast agents in x-ray procedures is to help highlight details of areas under study by making them
opaque. Agents for arthrography are generally air
and water-soluble dyes, the most common
containing iodine. Air and iodine may be used
together or independently. After the contrast
agent is administered, the site of injection will be
sealed and the patient may be asked to move the
joint around to distribute the contrast.
Before the contrast medium can be absorbed by
the joint itself, several films will be quickly taken
under the guidance of the fluoroscope. The patient
will be asked to move the joint into a series of
positions, keeping still between positioning.
Sometimes, the patient will experience some tingling
or discomfort during the procedure, which is normal and due to the contrast. Following fluoroscopic tracking of the contrast, standard x rays of
the area may also be taken. The entire procedure
will last about one hour.
Preparation
It is important to discuss any known sensitivity to
local anesthetics or iodine prior to this procedure. A
physician should explain the procedure and the risks
associated with contrast agents and ask the patient to
sign an informed consent. If iodine contrast will be
administered, the patient may be instructed not to eat
before the exam. The timeframe of fasting may extend
from only 90 minutes prior to the exam up to the night
before. There is no other preparation necessary.
Aftercare
The affected joint should be rested for approximately 12 hours following the procedure. The joint
may be wrapped in an elastic bandage and the patient
should receive instructions on the care and changing of
the bandage. Noises in the joint such as cracking
or clicking are normal for a few days following arthrography. These noises are the result of liquid in the joints.
Swelling may also occur and can be treated with application of ice or cold packs. A mild pain reliever can be
used to lessen pain in the first few days. However, if any
of these symptoms persist for more than a few days,
patients are advised to contact their physician.
Risks
In some patients iodine can cause allergic reactions,
ranging from mild nausea to severe cardiovascular or
nervous system complications. Since the contrast dye is
put into a joint, rather than into a vein, allergic reactions
are rare. Facilities licensed to perform contrast exams
should meet requirements for equipment, supplies and
staff training to handle a possible severe reaction.
Infection or joint damage are possible, although not
frequent, complications of arthrography.
Normal results
A normal arthrography exam will show proper placement of the dye or contrast medium throughout the
joint structures, joint space, cartilage and ligaments.
Abnormal results
The abnormal placement of dye may indicate
rheumatoid arthritis, cysts, joint dislocation, rupture
of the rotator cuff, tears in the ligament and other
conditions. The entire lining of the joint becomes opaque from the technique, which allows the radiologist
to see abnormalities in the intricate workings of the
joint. In the case of recurrent shoulder dislocations,
arthrography results can be used to evaluate damage.
Patients with hip prostheses may receive arthrography
to evaluate proper placement or function of their
prostheses.