Definition
Aspirin is a medicine that relieves pain and reduces
fever.
Purpose
Aspirin is used to relieve many kinds of minor
aches and pains–headaches, toothaches, muscle pain,
menstrual cramps, the joint pain from arthritis, and
aches associated with colds and flu. Some people take
aspirin daily to reduce the risk of stroke, heart attack,
or other heart problems.
Description
Aspirin–also known as acetylsalicylic acid–is sold
over the counter and comes in many forms, from the
familiar white tablets to chewing gum and rectal suppositories. Coated, chewable, buffered, and extended
release forms are available. Many other over-thecounter medicine contain aspirin. Alka-Seltzer
Original Effervescent Antacid Pain Reliever, for
example, contains aspirin for pain relief and sodium
bicarbonate to relieve acid indigestion, heartburn, and
sour stomach.
Aspirin belongs to a group of drugs called salicylates. Other members of this group include sodium
salicylate, choline salicylate, and magnesium salicylate. These drugs are more expensive and no more
effective than aspirin. However, they are a little easier
on the stomach. Aspirin is quickly absorbed into the
bloodstream and provides quick and relatively longlasting pain relief. Aspirin also reduces inflammation.
Researchers believe these effects come about because
aspirin blocks the production of pain-producing chemicals called prostaglandins.
In addition to relieving pain and reducing inflammation, aspirin also lowers fever by acting on the part
of the brain that regulates temperature. The brain then
signals the blood vessels to widen, which allows heat to
leave the body more quickly.
Recommended dosage
Adults
TO RELIEVE PAIN OR REDUCE FEVER. One to two
tablets every three to four hours, up to six times per day.
TO REDUCE THE RISK OF STROKE. One tablet four
times a day or two tablets twice a day.
TO REDUCE THE RISK OF HEART ATTACK. Check with
a physician for the proper dose and number of times
per week aspirin should, if at all, be taken.
Children
Check with a physician.
Precautions
Aspirin–even children’s aspirin–should never be
given to children or teenagers with flu-like symptoms
or chickenpox. Aspirin can cause Reye’s syndrome, a
life-threatening condition that affects the nervous system and liver. As many as 30% of children and teenagers who develop Reye’s syndrome die. Those who
survive may have permanent brain damage.
Check with a physician before giving aspirin to a
child under 12 years for arthritis, rheumatism, or any
condition that requires long-term use of the drug.
No one should take aspirin for more than 10 days
in a row unless told to do so by a physician. Anyone
with fever should not take aspirin for more than 3 days
without a physician’s consent. Do not to take more
than the recommended daily dosage.
People in the following categories should not use
aspirin without first checking with their physician:
 Pregnant women. Aspirin can cause bleeding problems in both the mother and the developing fetus.
Aspirin can also cause the infant’s weight to be too
low at birth.
 Women who are breastfeeding. Aspirin can pass into
breast milk and may affect the baby.
People with a history of bleeding problems.
 People who are taking blood-thinning drugs, such as
warfarin (Coumadin).
 People with a history of ulcers.
 People with a history of asthma, nasal polyps, or
both. These people are more likely to be allergic to
aspirin.
 People who are allergic to fenoprofen, ibuprofen,
indomethacin, ketoprofen, meclofenamate sodium,
naproxen, sulindac, tolmetin, or the orange foodcoloring tartrazine. They may also be allergic to
aspirin.
 People with AIDS or AIDS-related complex who are
taking AZT (zidovudine). Aspirin can increase the
risk of bleeding in these patients.
 People taking certain other drugs (discussed in
Interactions).
 People with liver damage or severe kidney failure.
Aspirin should not be taken before surgery, as it
can increase the risk of excessive bleeding. Anyone
who is scheduled for surgery should check with his or
her surgeon to find out how long before surgery to
avoid taking aspirin.
Aspirin can cause stomach irritation. To reduce
the likelihood of that problem, take aspirin with food
or milk or drink a full 8-oz glass of water with it.
Taking coated or buffered aspirin can also help. Be
aware that drinking alcohol can make the stomach
irritation worse.
Stop taking aspirin immediately and call a physician if any of these symptoms develop:
 ringing or buzzing in the ears
 hearing loss
 dizziness
 stomach pain that does not go away
Do not take aspirin that has a vinegary smell.
That is a sign that the aspirin is too old and ineffective.
Flush such aspirin down the toilet.
Because aspirin can increase the risk of excessive bleeding, do not take aspirin daily over long
periods–to reduce the risk of stroke or heart
attack, for example–unless advised to do so by a
physician.
Side effects
The most common side effects include stomachache, heartburn, loss of appetite, and small amounts of
blood in stools. Less common side effects are rashes,
hives, fever, vision problems, liver damage, thirst, stomach ulcers, and bleeding. People who are allergic to
aspirin or those who have asthma,rhinitis, or polyps in
the nose may have trouble breathing after taking
aspirin.
Interactions
Aspirin may increase, decrease, or change the
effects of many drugs. Aspirin can make drugs such
as methotrexate (Rheumatrex) and valproic acid
(Depakote, Depakene) more toxic. If taken with
blood-thinning drugs, such as warfarin (Coumadin)
and dicumarol, aspirin can increase the risk of
excessive bleeding. Aspirin counteracts the effects
of other drugs, such as angiotensin-converting
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and beta blockers, which
lower blood pressure, and medicines used to treat
gout (probenecid and sulfinpyrazone). Blood pressure may drop unexpectedly and cause fainting or
dizziness if aspirin is taken along with nitroglycerin
tablets. Aspirin may also interact with diuretics,
diabetes medicines, other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), seizure medications, and
steroids. Anyone who is taking these drugs should
ask his or her physician whether they can safely
take aspirin.