Definition
Atelectasis is a collapse of lung tissue affecting
part or all of one lung. This condition prevents normal
oxygen absoption to healthy tissues.
Description
Atelectasis can result from an obstruction (blockage) of the airways that affects tiny air scas called
alveoli. Alveoli are very thin-walled and contain a
rich blood supply. They are important for lung function, since their purpose is the exchange of oxygen and
carbon dioxide. When the airways are blocked by a
mucous ‘‘plug,’’ foreign object, or tumor, the alveoli
are unable to fill with air and collapse of lung tissue
can occur in the affected area. Atelectasis is a potential
complication following surgery, especially in individuals who have undergone chest or abdominal operations resulting in associated abdominal or chest pain
during breathing. Congenital atelectasis can result
from a failure of the lungs to expand at birth. This
congenital condition may be localized or may affect all
of both lungs.
Causes and symptoms
Causes of atelectasis include insufficient attemps
at respiration by the newborn, bronchial obstruction,
or absence of surfactant (a substance secreted by
alveoli that maintains the stability of lung tissue by
reducing the surface tension of fluids that coat the
lung). This lack of surfactant reduces the surface
area available for effective gas exchange causing it to
collapse if severe. Pressure on the lung from fluid or air
can cause atelectasis as well as obstruction of lung air
passages by thick mucus resulting from various infections and lung diseases. Tumors and inhaled objects
can also cause obstruction of the airway, leading to
atelectasis.
Anyone undergoing chest or abdominal surgery
using general anesthesia is at risk to develop atelectasis, since breathing is often shallow after surgery to
avoid pain from the surgical incision. Any significant
decrease in airflow to the alveoli contributes to pooling of secretions, which in turn can cause infection.
Chest injuries causing shallow breathing, including
fractured ribs, can cause atelectasis. Common symptoms of atelectasis include shortness of breath and
decreased chest wall expansion. If atelectasis only
afects a small area of the lung, symptoms are ususally
minimal. If the condition affects a large area of the
lung and develops quickly, the individual may turn
blue (cyanotic) or pale, have extreme shortness of
breath, and feel a stabbing pain on the affected side.
Fever and increased heart rate may be present if infection accompanies atelectasis.
Diagnosis
To diagnose atelectasis, a doctor starts by recording the patient’s symptoms and performing a thorough physical examination. When the doctor listens
to the lungs through a stethoscope (ausculation),
diminished or bronchial breath sounds may be heard.
By tapping on the chest (percussion) while listening
through the stethoscope, the doctor can often tell if the
lung is collapsed. A chest x ray that shows an airless
area in the lung confirms the diagnosis of atelectasis. If
an obstruction of the airways is suspected, a computed
tomography scan (CT) or bronchoscopy may be
performed to locate the cause of the blockage.
Treatment
If atelectasis is due to obstruction of the airway,
the first step in treatment is to remove the cause of
the blockage. This may be done by coughing, suctioning, or bronchoscopy. If a tumor is the cause of atelectasis, surgery may be necessary to remove it.
Antibiotics are commonly used to fight the infection
that often accompanies atelectasis. In cases where
recurrent or long-lasting infection is disabling or
where significant bleeding occurs, the affected section
of the lung may be surgically removed.
Prognosis
If atelectasis is caused by a thick mucus ‘‘plug’’ or
inhaled foreign object, the patient usually recovers completely when the blockage is removed. If it is caused by a
tumor, the outcome depends on the nature of the tumor
involved. If atelectasis is a result of surgery, other postoperative conditions and/or complications affect the
prognosis Prevention
When recovering from surgery, frequent repositioning in bed along with coughing and deep breathing are
important. Coughing and breathing deeply every one to
two hours after any surgical operation with general
anesthesia is recommended. Breathing exercises and the
use of breathing devices, such as an incentive spirometer,
may also help prevent atelectasis. Although smokers
have a higher risk of developing atelectasis following
surgery, stopping smoking six to eight weeks before surgery can help reduce the risk. Increasing fluid intake
during respiratory illness or after surgery (by mouth or
intravenously) helps lung secretions to remain loose.
Increasing humidity may also be beneficial.
Postural drainage techniques can be learned from
a respiratory therapist or physical therapist and are a
useful tool for anyone affected with a respiratiory illness that could cause atelectasis. Because foreign
objects blocking the airway can cause atelectasis, it is
very important to keep small objects that might be
inhaled away from young children.