Definition
The Atkins diet is a high-protein, high-fat, and
very low-carbohydrate regimen. It emphasizes meat,
cheese, and eggs, while discouraging foods such as
bread, pasta, fruit, and sugar. It is a form of ketogenic diet.
Purpose
The primary benefit of the diet is rapid and substantial weight loss. By restricting carbohydrate
intake, the body will burn more fat stored in the
body. Since there are no limits on the amount of
calories or quantities of foods allowed on the diet,
there is little hunger between meals. According to
Atkins, the diet can alleviate symptoms of conditions
such as fatigue, irritability, headaches, depression, and
some types of joint and muscle pain.
Description
The regimen is a low-carbohydrate, or ketogenic
diet, characterized by initial rapid weight loss, usually
due to water loss. Drastically reducing the amount of
carbohydrate intake causes liver and muscle glycogen
loss, which has a strong but temporary diuretic effect.
Long-term weight loss occurs because with a low
amount of carbohydrate intake, the body burns stored
fat for energy.
The four-step diet starts with a two-week induction program designed to rebalance an individual’s
metabolism. Unlimited amounts of fat and protein
are allowed but carbohydrate intake is restricted to
20 grams per day. Foods allowed include butter, oil,
meat, poultry, fish, eggs, cheese, and cream. The daily
amount of carbohydrates allowed equals about three
cups of salad vegetables, such as lettuce, cucumbers,
and celery.
The second stage is for ongoing weight loss. It
allows 20-40 grams of carbohydrates a day. When
the individual is about 10 pounds from their desired
weight, they begin the pre-maintenance phase. This
gradually adds one to three servings a week of high
carbohydrate foods, such as a piece of fruit or slice of
whole-wheat bread. When the desired weight is
reached, the maintenance stage begins. It allows
40-60 grams of carbohydrates per day.
Opinion from the general medical community
remains mixed on the Atkins diet. There have been
no significant long-term scientific studies on the diet.
A number of leading medical and health organizations, including the American Medical Association,
American Dietetic Association (ADA), and the
American Heart Association oppose it. It is drastically
different than the dietary intakes recommended by the
U.S. Department of Agriculture and the National
Institutes of Health. Much of the opposition is because
the diet is lacking in some vitamins and nutrients, and
because it is high in fat. In a hearing before the U.S.
Congress on February 24, 2000, an ADA representative called the Atkins diet ‘‘hazardous’’ and said it
lacked scientific credibility.
Preparations
No advance preparation is needed to go on the
diet. However, as with most diets, it is generally considered appropriate to consult with a physician and to
have a physical evaluation before starting such a nutritional regimen. The evaluation should include blood
tests to determine levels of cholesterol, triglycerides,
glucose, insulin, and uric acid. A glucose tolerance test
is also recommended.
Precautions
Adherence to the Atkins diet can result in vitamin
and mineral deficiencies. In his books, Atkins recommends a wide-range of nutritional supplements, including a multi-vitamin. Among his recommendations,
Atkins suggests the following daily dosages: 300-600
micrograms (mcg) of chromium picolinate, 100-400
milligrams (mg) of pantetheine, 200 mcg of selenium,
and 450-675 mcg of biotin.
The diet is not recommended for lacto-ovo vegetarians, since it cannot be done as successfully without
protein derived from animal products. Also, vegans
cannot follow this diet, since a vegan diet is too high in
carbohydrates, according to Atkins. Instead, he
recommends vegetarians with a serious weight problem give up vegetarianism, or at least include fish in
their diet.
Side effects
According to Atkins, the diet causes no adverse
side effects. Many health care professionals disagree. In a fact sheet for the Healthcare Reality
Check Web site (<http://www.hcrc.org>), Ellen
Coleman, a registered dietician and author, said
the diet may have serious side effects for some people. She said complications associated with the diet
include ketosis, dehydration, electrolyte loss, calcium
depletion, weakness, nausea, and kidney problems.
‘‘It is certainly riskier for overweight individuals with
medical problems such as heart disease, hypertension,
kidney disease, and diabetes than it is for overweight
people with no health problems,’’ she said.
People with diabetes taking insulin are at risk of
becoming hypoglycemic if they do not eat appropriate
carbohydrates. Also, persons who exercise regularly
may experience low energy levels and muscle fatigue
from low carbohydrate intake.