Definition
Audiometry is the testing of a person’s ability to
hear various sound frequencies. The test is performed
with the use of electronic equipment called an audiometer. This testing is usually administered by a trained
technician called an audiologist.
Purpose
Audiometry testing is used to identify and diagnose hearing loss. The equipment is used in health
screening programs, for example in grade schools, to
detect hearing problems in children. It is also used in
the doctor’s office or hospital audiology department
to diagnose hearing problems in children, adults, and
the elderly. With correct diagnosis of a person’s specific pattern of hearing impairment, the right type of
therapy, which might include hearing aids, corrective
surgery, or speech therapy, can be prescribed.
Precautions
Testing with audiometry equipment is simple and
painless. No special precautions are required.
Description
A trained audiologist (a specialist in detecting
hearing loss) uses an audiometer to conduct audiometry testing. This equipment emits sounds or tones, like
musical notes, at various frequencies, or pitches, and
at differing volumes or levels of loudness. Testing is
usually done in a soundproof testing room.
The person being tested wears a set of headphones that blocks out other distracting sounds and
delivers a test tone to one ear at a time. At the sound
of a tone, the patient holds up a hand or finger to
indicate that the sound is detected. The audiologist
lowers the volume and repeats the sound until the
patient can no longer detect it. This process is
repeated over a wide range of tones or frequencies
from very deep, low sounds, like the lowest note
played on a tuba, to very high sounds, like the
pinging of a triangle. Each ear is tested separately.
It is not unusual for levels of sensitivity to sound to
differ from one ear to the other.
A second type of audiometry testing uses a headband rather than headphones. The headband is worn
with small plastic rectangles that fit behind the ears to
conduct sound through the bones of the skull. The
patient being tested senses the tones that are transmitted as vibrations through the bones to the inner
ear. As with the headphones, the tones are repeated at
various frequencies and volumes.
The results of the audiometry test may be recorded
on a grid or graph called an audiogram. This graph is
generally set up with low frequencies or tones at one end
and high ones at the other end, much like a piano keyboard. Low notes are graphed on the left and high notes
on the right. The graph also charts the volume of the
tones used; from soft, quiet sounds at the top of the
chart to loud sounds at the bottom. Hearing is measured in units called decibels. Most of the sounds associated with normal speech patterns are generally spoken
in the range of 20-50 decibels. An adult with normal
hearing can detect tones between 0-20 decibels.
Speech audiometry is another type of testing that
uses a series of simple recorded words spoken at various volumes into headphones worn by the patient
being tested. The patient repeats each word back to
the audiologist as it is heard. An adult with normal
hearing will be able to recognize and repeat 90-100%
of the words.
Preparation
The ears may be examined with an otoscope prior
to audiometry testing to determine if there are any
blockages in the ear canal due to ear wax or other
material.
Normal results
A person with normal hearing will be able to
recognize and respond to all of the tone frequencies
administered at various volumes in both ears by the
audiometry test. An adult with normal hearing can
detect a range of low and high pitched sounds that
are played as softly as between nearly 0-20 decibels.
Normal speech is generally spoken in the range of
20-50 decibels.
Abnormal results
Audiometry test results are considered abnormal
if there is a significant or unexplained difference
between the levels of sound heard between the two
ears, or if the person being tested is unable to hear in
the normal range of frequencies and volume. The
pattern of responses displayed on the audiogram can
be used by the audiologist to identify if a significant
hearing loss is present and if the patient might benefit
from hearing aids or corrective surgery.