Definition
Autoimmune disorders are conditions in which a
person’s immune system attacks the body’s own cells,
causing tissue destruction.
Description
Autoimmunity is accepted as the cause of a wide
range of disorders, and it is suspected to be responsible
for many more. Autoimmune diseases are classified as
either general, in which the autoimmune reaction
takes place simultaneously in a number of tissues, or
organ specific, in which the autoimmune reaction targets a single organ.
Autoimmune disorders include the following:
 Systemic lupus erythematosus. A general autoimmune disease in which antibodies attack a number
 of different tissues. The disease recurs periodically
and is seen mainly in young and middle-aged women.
 Rheumatoid arthritis. Occurs when the immune system attacks and destroys the tissues that line bone
joints and cartilage. The disease occurs throughout
the body, although some joints may be more affected
than others.
 Goodpasture’s syndrome. Occurs when antibodies
are deposited in the membranes of both the lung
and kidneys, causing both inflammation of kidney
glomerulus (glomerulonephritis) and lung bleeding. It
is typically a disease of young males.
 Grave’s disease. Caused by an antibody that binds to
specific cells in the thyroid gland, causing them to
make excessive amounts of thyroid hormone.
 Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. Caused by an antibody that
binds to cells in the thyroid gland. Unlike in Grave’s
disease, however, this antibody’s action results in less
thyroid hormone being made.
 Pemphigus vulgaris. A group of autoimmune disorders that affect the skin.
 Myasthenia gravis. A condition in which the immune
system attacks a receptor on the surface of muscle
cells, preventing the muscle from receiving nerve
impulses and resulting in severe muscle weakness.
 Scleroderma. Also called CREST syndrome or progressive systemic sclerosis, scleroderma affects the
connective tissue.
 Autoimmune hemolytic anemia. Occurs when the
body produces antibodies that coat red blood cells.
 Autoimmune thrombocytopenic purpura. Disorder
in which the immune system targets and destroys
blood platelets.
 Polymyositis and Dermatomyositis. Immune disorders that affect the neuromuscular system.
 Pernicious anemia. Disorder in which the immune
system attacks the lining of the stomach in such a
way that the body cannot metabolize vitamin B12.
 Sjo¨gren’s syndrome. Occurs when the exocrine
glands are attacked by the immune system, resulting
in excessive dryness.
 Ankylosing spondylitis. Immune system induced
degeneration of the joints and soft tissue of the spine.
 Vasculitis. A group of autoimmune disorders in
which the immune system attacks and destroys
blood vessels.
 Type I diabetes mellitus. May be caused by an antibody that attacks and destroys the islet cells of the
pancreas, which produce insulin.
 Amyotrophic lateral schlerosis. Also called Lou
Gehrig’s disease. An immune disorder that causes
the death of neurons which leads to progressive loss
of muscular control.
 Guillain-Barre syndrome. Also called infectious
polyneuritis. Often occurring after an infection or
an immunization (specifically Swine flu), the disease
affects the myelin sheath, which coats nerve cells. It
causes progressive muscle weakness and paralysis.
 Multiple sclerosis. An autoimmune disorder that may
involve a virus affects the central nervous system,
causing loss of coordination and muscle control.
Causes and symptoms
To further understand autoimmune disorders, it is
helpful to understand the workings of the immune
system. The purpose of the immune system is to defend
the body against attack by infectious microbes (germs)
and foreign objects. When the immune system attacks
an invader, it is very specific—a particular immune
system cell will only recognize and target one type of
invader. To function properly, the immune system must
not only develop this specialized knowledge of individual invaders, but it must also learn how to recognize
and not destroy cells that belong to the body itself.
Every cell carries protein markers on its surface that
identifies it in one of two ways: what kind of cell it is
(e.g. nerve cell, muscle cell, blood cell, etc.) and to
whom that cell belongs. These markers are called
major histocompatability complexes (MHCs). When
functioning properly, cells of the immune system will
not attack any other cell with markers identifying it as
belonging to the body. Conversely, if the immune system cells do not recognize the cell as ‘‘self,’’ they attach
themselves to it and put out a signal that the body has
been invaded, which in turn stimulates the production
of substances such as antibodies that engulf and destroy
the foreign particles. In case of autoimmune disorders,
the immune system cannot distinguish between ‘‘self’’
cells and invader cells. As a result, the same destructive
operation is carried out on the body’s own cells that
would normally be carried out on bacteria, viruses, and
other such harmful entities.
The reasons why immune systems become dysfunctional in this way is not well understood.
However, most researchers agree that a combination
of genetic, environmental, and hormonal factors
play into autoimmunity. Researchers also speculate
that certain mechanisms may trigger autoimmunity.
First, a substance that is normally restricted to one
part of the body, and therefore not usually exposed
to the immune system, is released into other areas
where it is attacked. Second, the immune system
may mistake a component of the body for a similar
foreign component. Third, cells of the body may be
altered in some way, either by drugs, infection, or
some other environmental factor, so that they are
no longer recognizable as ‘‘self’’ to the immune
system. Fourth, the immune system itself may be
damaged, such as by a genetic mutation, and therefore cannot function properly.
The symptoms of the above disorders include:
 Systemic lupus erythematosus. Symptoms include
fever, chills, fatigue, weight loss, skin rashes (particularly the classic ‘‘butterfly’’ rash on the face), vasculitis, polyarthralgia, patchy hair loss, sores in the mouth
or nose, lymph-node enlargement, gastric problems,
and, in women, irregular periods. About half of those
who suffer from lupus develop cardiopulmonary problems, and some may also develop urinary problems.
Lupus can also effect the central nervous system,
causing seizures, depression, and psychosis.
 Rheumatoid arthritis. Initially may be characterized
by a low-grade fever, loss of appetite, weight loss,
and a generalized pain in the joints. The joint pain
then becomes more specific, usually beginning in the
fingers, then spreading to other areas, such as the
wrists, elbows, knees, and ankles. As the disease
progresses, joint function diminishes sharply and
deformities occur, particularly the characteristic
‘‘swan’s neck’’ curling of the fingers.
 Goodpasture’s syndrome. Symptoms are similar to
that of iron deficiency anemia, including fatigue and
pallor. Symptoms involving the lungs may range
from a cough that produces bloody sputum to outright hemorrhaging. Symptoms involving the urinary system include blood in the urine and/or swelling.
 Grave’s disease. This disease is characterized by an
enlarged thyroid gland, weight loss without loss of
appetite, sweating, heart palpitations, nervousness,
and an inability to tolerate heat.
 Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. This disorder generally displays no symptoms.
 Pemphigus vulgaris. This disease is characterized by
blisters and deep lesions on the skin.
 Myasthenia gravis. Characterized by fatigue and muscle weakness that at first may be confined to certain
muscle groups, but then may progress to the point of
paralysis. Myasthenia gravis patients often have
expressionless faces as well as difficulty chewing and
swallowing. If the disease progresses to the respiratory
system, artificial respiration may be required.
 Scleroderma. Disorder is usually preceded by
Raynaud’s phenomenon. Symptoms that follow
include pain, swelling, and stiffness of the joints,
and the skin takes on a tight, shiny appearance. The
digestive system also becomes involved, resulting in
weight loss, appetite loss, diarrhea, constipation, and
distention of the abdomen. As the disease progresses,
the heart, lungs, and kidneys become involved, and
malignant hypertension causes death in approximately 30% of cases.
 Autoimmune hemolytic anemia. May be acute or
chronic. Symptoms include fatigue and abdominal
tenderness due to an enlarged spleen.
 Autoimmune thrombocytopenic purpura. Characterized by pinhead-size red dots on the skin, unexplained
bruises, bleeding from the nose and gums, and blood in
the stool.
 Polymyositis and Dermatomyositis. In polymyositis,
symptoms include muscle weakness, particularly in
the shoulders or pelvis, that prevents the patient from
performing everyday activities. In dermatomyositis,
the same muscle weakness is accompanied by a rash
that appears on the upper body, arms, and fingertips.
A rash may also appear on the eyelids, and the area
around the eyes may become swollen.
 Pernicious anemia. Signs of pernicious anemia
include weakness, sore tongue, bleeding gums, and
tingling in the extremities. Because the disease causes
a decrease in stomach acid, nausea, vomiting, loss of
appetite, weight loss, diarrhea, and constipation are
possible. Also, because Vitamin B12 is essential for
the nervous system function, the deficiency of it
brought on by the disease can result in a host of
neurological problems, including weakness, lack of
coordination, blurred vision, loss of fine motor skills,
loss of the sense of taste, ringing in the ears, and loss
of bladder control.
 Sjo¨gren’s syndrome. Characterized by excessive dryness of the mouth and eyes.
 Ankylosing spondylitis. Generally begins with lower
back pain that progresses up the spine. The pain may
eventually become crippling.
 Vasculitis. Symptoms depend upon the group of
veins affected and can range greatly
Type I diabetes mellitus. Characterized by fatigue
and an abnormally high level of glucose in the
blood (hyperglycemia).
 Amyotrophic lateral schlerosis. First signs are stumbling and difficulty climbing stairs. Later, muscle
cramps and twitching may be observed as well as
weakness in the hands making fastening buttons or
turning a key difficult. Speech may become slowed or
slurred. There may also be difficluty swallowing. As
respiratory muscles atrophy, there is increased danger of aspiration or lung infection.
 Guillain-Barre syndrome. Muscle weakness in the legs
occurs first, then the arms and face. Paresthesias (a
prickly, tingling sensation) is also felt. This disorder
affects both sides of the body and may involve paralysis and the muscles that control breathing.
 Multiple sclerosis. Like Lou Gehrig’s disease, the
first symptom may be clumsiness. Weakness or
exhaustion is often reported, as well as blurry or
double vision. There may be dizziness, depression,
loss of bladder control, and muscle weakness so
severe that the patient is confined to a wheelchair.
Diagnosis
A number of tests are involved in the diagnosis
of autoimmune diseases, depending on the particular
disease; e.g. blood tests, cerebrospinal fluid analysis,
electromylogram (measures muscle function), and
magnetic resonance imaging of the brain. Usually,
these tests determine the location and extent of
damage or involvement. They are useful in charting
progress of the disease and as baselines for
treatment.
The principle tool, however, for authenticating
autoimmune disease is antibody testing. Such tests
involve measuring the level of antibodies found in
the blood and determining if they react with specific
antigens that would give rise to an autoimmune reaction. An elevated amount of antibodies indicates that
a humoral immune reaction is occurring. Since elevated antibody levels are also seen in common infections, they must be ruled out as the cause for the
increased antibody levels.
Antibodies can also be typed by class. There are
five classes of antibodies, and they can be separated in
the laboratory. The class IgG is usually associated
with autoimmune diseases. Unfortunately, IgG class
antibodies are also the main class of antibody seen in
normal immune responses.
The most useful antibody tests involve introducing the patient’s antibodies to samples of his or her
own tissue, usually thyroid, stomach, liver, and kidney
tissue. If antibodies bind to the ‘‘self’’ tissue, it is
diagnostic for an autoimmune disorder. Antibodies
from a person without an autoimmune disorder
would not react to ‘‘self ’’ tissue.
Treatment
Treatment of autoimmune diseases is specific to
the disease, and usually concentrates on alleviating or
preventing symptoms rather than correcting the
underlying cause. For example, if a gland involved in
an autoimmune reaction is not producing a hormone
such as insulin, administration of that hormone is
required. Administration of a hormone, however,
will restore the function of the gland damaged by the
autoimmune disease.
The other aspect of treatment is controlling the
inflammatory and proliferative nature of the immune
response. This is generally accomplished with two
types of drugs. Steroid compounds are used to control
inflammation. There are many different steroids, each
having side effects. The proliferative nature of the
immune response is controlled with immunosuppressive drugs. These drugs work by inhibiting the replication of cells and, therefore, also suppress non-immune
cells leading to side effects such as anemia.
Systemic enzyme therapy is a new treatment that is
showing results for rheumatoid arthritis, multiple
sclerosis, ankylosing spondylitis, and other inflammatory diseases. Enzymes combinations of pancreatin,
trypsin, chymotrypsin, bromelain, and papain help
stimulate the body’s own defenses, accelerate inflammation in order to reduce swelling and improve circulation, and break up the immune complexes within the
bloodstream. Symptoms have been reduced using this
treatment.
Other treatments that hold some promise are irradiation of the spleen and gene therapy. Splenic irradiation is touted to be a safe, alternative for patients with
autoimmune blood diseases, especially autoimmune
hemolytic anemia, or others with compromised
immune systems, such as HIV patients and the elderly.
It is reported to have few side effects and seems to be
working. Cytokine and cytokine inhibitor genes
injected directly into muscle tissue also appear to be
effective in treating Type I diabetes mellitus, systemic
lupus erythematosus, thyroditis, and arthritis.
Prognosis
Prognosis depends upon the pathology of each
autoimmune disease
Prevention
Most autoimmune diseases cannot be prevented.
Though the mechanisms involved in how these diseases affect the body are known, it is still unclear
why the body turns on itself. Since more women than
men seem to be affected by some of these disorders
(e.g. lupus), some researchers are looking into hormones as a factor. This, and gene therapy, may be
the preventatives of the future.