Definition
An autopsy is a postmortem assessment or examination of a body to determine the cause of death. An
autopsy is performed by a physician trained in
pathology.
Purpose
Most autopsies advance medical knowledge and
provide evidence for legal action. Medically, autopsies
determine the exact cause and circumstances of death,
discover the pathway of a disease, and provide valuable
information to be used in the care of the living. When
foul play is suspected, a government coroner or medical
examiner performs autopsies for legal use. This branch
of medical study is called forensic medicine. Forensic
specialists investigate deaths resulting from violence
or occurring under suspicious circumstances.
Benefits of research from autopsies include the
production of new medical information on diseases
such as toxic shock syndrome, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Organ donation, which can
potentially save the lives of other patients, is also
another benefit of autopsies.
Precautions
When performed for medical reasons, autopsies
require formal permission from family members or the
legal guardian. (Autopsies required for legal reasons
when foul play is suspected do not need the consent of next of kin.) During the autopsy, very concise notes
and documentation must be made for both medical
and legal reasons. Some religious groups prohibit
autopsies.
Description
An autopsy can be described as the examination
of a deceased human body with a detailed exam of
the person’s remains. This procedure dates back to
the Roman era when few human dissections were
performed; autopsies were utilized, however, to
determine the cause of death in criminal cases. At
the beginning of the procedure the exterior body is
examined and then the internal organs are removed
and studied. Some pathologists argue that more
autopsies are performed than necessary. However,
recent studies show that autopsies can detect major
findings about a person’s condition that were not
suspected when the person was alive. And the growing awareness of the influence of genetic factors in
disease has also emphasized the importance of
autopsies.
Despite the usefulness of autopsies, fewer autopsies have been performed in the United States during
the past 10-20 years. A possible reason for this decline
is concern about malpractice suits on the part of the
treating physician. Other possible reasons are that
hospitals are performing fewer autopsies because of
the expense or because modern technology, such as
CT scans and magnetic resonance imaging, can
often provide sufficient diagnostic information.
Nonetheless, federal regulators and pathology groups
have begun to establish new guidelines designed to
increase the number and quality of autopsies being
performed.
Many experts are concerned that if the number of
autopsies increases, hospitals may be forced to charge
families a fee for the procedure as autopies are not
normally covered by insurance companies or
Medicare. Yet, according to several pathologists, the
benefit of the procedure for families and doctors does
justify the cost. In medical autopsies, physicians
remain cautious to examine only as much of the
body as permitted according to the wishes of the
family. It is important to note that autopsies can also
provide peace of mind for the bereaved family in certain situations.
Preparation
If a medical autopsy is being performed, written
permission is secured from the family of the deceased
Aftercare
Once the autopsy has been completed, the body is
prepared for final arrangements according to the
family’s wishes
Risks
There are some risks of disease transmission from
the deceased. In fact, some physicans may refuse to do
autopsies on specific patients because of a fear of
contracting diseases such as AIDS, hepatitis, or
Creutzfeld-Jakob disease.
Normal results
In most situations the cause of death is determined
from the procedure of an autopsy without any transmission of disease.
Abnormal results
Abnormal results would include inconclusive
results from the autopsy and transmission of infectious disease during the autopsy.