Definition
Ayurvedic medicine is a system of healing that originated in ancient India. In Sanskrit, ayur means life or
living, andvedameans knowledge, soAyurveda has been
defined as the ‘‘knowledge of living’’ or the ‘‘science of
longevity.’’ Ayurvedic medicine utilizes diet, detoxification and purification techniques, herbal and mineral
remedies, yoga, breathing exercises, meditation, and
massage therapy as holistic healing methods. Ayurvedic
medicine is widely practiced in modern India and has
been steadily gaining followers in the West.
Purpose
According to the original texts, the goal of
Ayurveda is prevention as well as promotion of the
body’s own capacity for maintenance and balance.
Ayurvedic treatment is non-invasive and non-toxic, so
it can be used safely as an alternative therapy or alongside conventional therapies. Ayurvedic physicians
claim that their methods can also help stress-related,
metabolic, and chronic conditions. Ayurveda has been
used to treat acne, allergies, asthma, anxiety, arthritis,
chronic fatigue syndrome, colds, colitis, constipation,
depression, diabetes, flu, heart disease, hypertension,
immune problems, inflammation, insomnia, nervous
disorders, obesity, skin problems, and ulcers.
Ayurvedic physicians seek to discover the roots
of a disease before it gets so advanced that more
radical treatments are necessary. Thus, Ayurveda
seems to be limited in treating severely advanced
conditions, traumatic injuries, acute pain, and conditions and injuries requiring invasive surgery.
Ayurvedic techniques have also been used alongside
chemotherapy and surgery to assist patients in
recovery and healing.
Description
Origins
Ayurvedic medicine originated in the early civilizations of India some 3,000-5,000 years ago. It is
mentioned in the Vedas, the ancient religious and
philosophical texts that are the oldest surviving literature in the world, which makes Ayurvedic medicine
the oldest surviving healing system. According to the
texts, Ayurveda was conceived by enlightened wise
men as a system of living harmoniously and maintaining the body so that mental and spiritual awareness
could be possible. Medical historians believe that
Ayurvedic ideas were transported from ancient India
to China and were instrumental in the development of
Chinese medicine.
Today, Ayurvedic medicine is used by 80% of the
population in India. Aided by the efforts of Deepak
Chopra and the Maharishi, it has become an increasingly accepted alternative medical treatment in
America during the last two decades. Chopra is an
M.D. who has written several bestsellers based on
Ayurvedic ideas. He also helped develop the Center
for Mind/Body Medicine in La Jolla, California, a
major Ayurvedic center that trains physicians in
Ayurvedic principles, produces herbal remedies, and
conducts research and documentation of its healing
techniques.
Key ideas
To understand Ayurvedic treatment, it is necessary
to have an idea how the Ayurvedic system views the
body. The basic life force in the body is prana, which is
also found in the elements and is similar to the Chinese
notion of chi. As Swami Vishnudevananda, a yogi and
expert, put it, ‘‘Prana is in the air, but is not the oxygen,
nor any of its chemical constituents. It is in food, water,
and in the sunlight, yet it is not vitamin, heat, or lightrays. Food, water, air, etc., are only the media through
which the prana is carried.’’
In Ayurveda, there are five basic elements that
contain prana: earth, water, fire, air, and ether.
These elements interact and are further organized in
the human body as three main categories or basic
physiological principles in the body that govern all
bodily functions known as the doshas. The three
doshas are vata, pitta, and kapha. Each person has a
unique blend of the three doshas, known as the person’s prakriti, which is why Ayurvedic treatment is
always individualized. In Ayurveda, disease is viewed
as a state of imbalance in one or more of a person’s
doshas, and an Ayurvedic physician strives to adjust
and balance them, using a variety of techniques.
The vata dosha is associated with air and ether,
and in the body promotes movement and lightness.
Vata people are generally thin and light physically,
dry-skinned, and very energetic and mentally restless.
When vata is out of balance, there are often nervous
problems, hyperactivity, sleeplessness, lower back
pains, and headaches.
Pitta is associated with fire and water. In the body,
it is responsible for metabolism and digestion. Pitta
characteristics are medium-built bodies, fair skin,
strong digestion, and good mental concentration.
Pitta imbalances show up as anger and aggression
and stress-related conditions like gastritis, ulcers,
liver problems, and hypertension.
The kapha dosha is associated with water and
earth. People characterized as kapha are generally
large or heavy with more oily complexions. They
tend to be slow, calm, and peaceful. Kapha disorders
manifest emotionally as greed and possessiveness, and
physically as obesity, fatigue, bronchitis, and sinus
problems.
Diagnosis
In Ayurvedic medicine, disease is always seen as
an imbalance in the dosha system, so the diagnostic
process strives to determine which doshas are
underactive or overactive in a body. Diagnosis is
often taken over a course of days in order for the
Ayurvedic physician to most accurately determine
what parts of the body are being affected. To diagnose problems, Ayurvedic physicians often use
long questionnaires and interviews to determine a
person’s dosha patterns and physical and psychological histories. Ayurvedic physicians also intricately
observe the pulse, tongue, face, lips, eyes, and fingernails for abnormalities or patterns that they
believe can indicate deeper problems in the internal
systems. Some Ayurvedic physicians also use
laboratory tests to assist in diagnosis.
Treatment
Ayurvedic treatment seeks to re-establish balance
and harmony in the body’s systems. Usually the first
method of treatment involves some sort of detoxification and cleansing of the body, in the belief that accumulated toxins must be removed before any other
methods of treatment will be effective. Methods of
detoxification include therapeutic vomiting, laxatives,
medicated enemas, fasting, and cleansing of the
sinuses. Many Ayurvedic clinics combine all of these
cleansing methods into intensive sessions known as
panchakarma. Panchakarma can take several days or
even weeks and they are more than elimination therapies. They also include herbalized oil massage and
herbalized heat treatments. After purification,
Ayurvedic physicians use herbal and mineral remedies
to balance the body as well. Ayurvedic medicine contains a vast knowledge of the use of herbs for specific
health problems.
Ayurvedic medicine also emphasizes how people
live their lives from day to day, believing that proper
lifestyles and routines accentuate balance, rest, diet,
and prevention. Ayurveda recommends yoga as a
form of exercise to build strength and health, and
also advises massage therapy and self-massage as
ways of increasing circulation and reducing stress.
Yogic breathing techniques and meditation are also
part of a healthy Ayurvedic regimen, to reduce stress
and improve mental energy
Of all treatments, though, diet is one of the most
basic and widely used therapy in the Ayurvedic system. An Ayurvedic diet can be a very well planned and
individualized regimen. According to Ayurveda, there
are six basic tastes: sweet, sour, salty, pungent, bitter,
and astringent. Certain tastes and foods can either
calm or aggravate a particular dosha. For instance,
sweet, sour, and salty decrease vata problems and
increase kapha. Sour, salty, and pungent can increase
pitta. After an Ayurvedic physician determines a person’s dosha profile, they will recommend a specific
diet to correct imbalances and increase health. The
Ayurvedic diet emphasizes primarily vegetarian
foods of high quality and freshness, tailored to the
season and time of day. Cooling foods are eaten in
the summer and heating ones in the winter, always
within a person’s dosha requirements. In daily routine,
the heaviest meal of the day should be lunch, and
dinner should eaten well before bedtime, to allow for
complete digestion. Also, eating meals in a calm manner with proper chewing and state of mind is important, as is combining foods properly and avoiding
overeating.
Cost
Costs of Ayurvedic treatments can vary, with
initial consultations running anywhere from $40 to
over $100, with follow-up visits costing less. Herbal
treatments may cost from $10 to $50 per month, and
are often available from health food or bulk herb
stores. Some clinics offer panchakarma, the intensive
Ayurvedic detoxification treatment, which can include
overnight stays for up to several weeks. The prices for
these programs can vary significantly, depending on
the services and length of stay. Insurance reimbursement may depend on whether the primary physician is
a licensed M.D.
Preparations
Ayurveda is a mind/body system of health that
contains some ideas foreign to the Western scientific model. Those people considering Ayurveda
should approach it with an open mind and willingness to experiment. Also, because Ayurveda is a
whole-body system of healing and health, patience
and discipline are helpful, as some conditions and
diseases are believed to be brought on by years of
bad health habits and require time and effort to
correct. Finally, the Ayurvedic philosophy believes
that each person has the ability to heal themselves,
so those considering Ayurveda should be prepared
to bring responsibility and participation into the
treatment.
Precautions
An Ayurvedic practitioner should always be
consulted.
Side effects
During Ayurvedic detoxification programs, some
people report fatigue, muscle soreness, and general
sickness. Also, as Ayurveda seeks to release mental
stresses and psychological problems from the patient,
some people can experience mental disturbances and
depression during treatment, and psychological counseling may be part of a sound program.
Research and general acceptance
Because Ayurveda had been outside the Western
scientific system for years, research in the United
States is new. Another difficulty in documentation
arises because Ayurvedic treatment is very individualized; two people with the same disease but different
dosha patterns might be treated differently. Much
more scientific research has been conducted over the
past several decades in India. Much research in the
United States is being supported by the Maharishi
Ayur-Ved organization, which studies the Ayurvedic
products it sells and its clinical practices.
Some Ayurvedic herbal mixtures have been proven to have high antioxidant properties, much stronger than vitamins A, C, and E, and some have also
been shown in laboratory tests to reduce or eliminate
tumors in mice and to inhibit cancer growth in human
lung tumor cells. In a 1987 study at MIT, an Ayurvedic
herbal remedy was shown to significantly reduce colon
cancer in rats. Another study was performed in the
Netherlands with Maharishi Ayur-Ved products. A
group of patients with chronic illnesses, including
asthma, chronic bronchitis, hypertension, eczema,
psoriasis, constipation, rheumatoid arthritis, headaches, and non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus,
were given Ayurvedic treatment. Strong results were
observed, with nearly 80% of the patients improving
and some chronic conditions being completely cured.
Other studies have shown that Ayurvedic therapies
can significantly lower cholesterol and blood pressure in
stress-related problems. Diabetes, acne, and allergies
have also been successfully treated with Ayurvedic remedies. Ayurvedic products have been shown to increase
short-term memory and reduce headaches. Also,
Ayurvedic remedies have been used successfully to support the healing process of patients undergoing chemotherapy, as these remedies have been demonstrated
to increase immune system activity.