 Definition
 Babesiosis is an infection of red blood cells caused
 by the single-celled parasite, Babesia microti, which is
 spread to humans by a tick bite.
 Causes and symptoms
 Babesia microti live and divide within red blood
 cells, destroying the cells and causing anemia. The
 majority of people who are infected have no visible
 symptoms. In those who becomeill, symptoms appear
 one to six weeks following the tick bite. Because the
 ticks are small, many patients have no recollection of a
 tick bite. The symptoms are flu-like and include tired
ness, loss of appetite, fever, drenching sweats, and
 muscle pain. Nausea, vomiting, headache, shaking
 chills, blood in the urine, and depression can occur.
 Description
 Babesiosis is a rare, tick-transmitted disease that
 is caused most often by the single-celled parasite
 Babesia microti. By 1995, fewer than 500 cases of
 babesiosis had been reported in the United States.
 The disease occurs primarily in New England and
 New York, especially on the coastal islands.
 However, cases have occurred in other parts of the
 United States. Because of tick activity, the risk for
 babesiosis is highest during June and July.
 Ticks are small, blood-sucking arachnids.
 Although some ticks carry diseasecausing organisms,
 most do not. Babesia microti is spread to humans
 through the bite of the tick Ixodes scapularis (also
 called Ixodes dammini). Ixodes scapularis, called the
 ‘‘blacklegged deer tick,’’ usually feeds on deer and
 mice. A tick picks up the parasites by feeding on an
 infected mouse and then passes them on by biting a
 new host, possibly a human. To pass on the parasites,
 the tick must be attached to the skin for 36-48 hours.
 Once in the bloodstream, Babesia microti enters a red
 blood cell, reproduces by cell division, and destroys
 the cell, causing anemia. Humans infected with
 Babesia microti produce antibodies that can be helpful
 in diagnosing the infection.
 Persons who are over 40 years old, have had their
 spleen removed (splenectomized), and/or have a ser
ious disease (cancer, AIDS, etc.) are at a greater risk
 for severe babesiosis. In severe cases of babesiosis, up
 to 85%ofthebloodcellscanbeinfected. Thiscauses a
 serious, possibly fatal, blood deficiency.
 Diagnosis
 Babesiosis can be diagnosedbyexamining ablood
 sample microscopically and detecting the presence of
 Babesia microti within the blood cells. The blood can
 also be checked for the presence of antibodies to the
 parasite.
 Treatment
 In serious cases, babesiosis is treated with a
 combination of clindamycin (Cleocin) and quinine.
 Clindamycin is given by injection and quinine is given
 orally three to four times a day for four to seven days.
 Toreducethenumberofparasitesintheblood,severely
 ill patients have been treated with blood transfusions.
 Prognosis
 Otherwise healthy patients will recover comple
tely. Babesiosis may last several months without  treatment and is a severe, potentially fatal disease in
 splenectomized patients.
 Prevention
 The only prevention for babesiosis is to minimize
 exposure to ticks by staying on trails when walking
 through the woods, avoiding tall grasses, wearing long
 sleeves and tucking pantlegs into socks, wearinginsect
 repellent, and checking for ticks after an outing.
 Remove a tick as soon as possible by grasping the
 tick with tweezers and gently pulling. Splenectomized
 people should avoid northeastern coastal regions
 during the tick season.