 Definition
 A life-threatening but curable infection that
 causes an eruption of purple lesions on or under the
 skin that resemble Kaposi’s sarcoma. The infection,
 which occurs almost exclusively in patients with
 AIDS, can be a complication of cat-scratch disease.
 Description
 Bacillary angiomatosis is a re-emerging bacterial
 infection that is identical or closely related to one
 which commonlyafflicted thousands of soldiers during
 World War I. Today, the disease, caused by two ver
sions of the same bacteria, is linked to homeless AIDS
 patients and to those afflicted with cat-scratch disease.
 The infection is rarely seen today in patients who
 don’t have HIV. According to the U.S. Centers for
 Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), an HIV
 patient diagnosed with bacillary angiomatosis is con
sidered to have progressed to full-blown AIDS.
 Causes and symptoms
 Scientists have recently isolated two varieties of
 the Bartonella bacteria as the cause of bacillary angio
matosis: Bartonella (formerly Rochalimaea quintana)
 and B. henselae (cause of cat-scratch disease).
 B. quintana infection is known popularly as trench
 fever, and is the infection associated with body lice that
 sickened European troops during World War I. Lice
 carry the bacteria, and can transmit the infection to
 humans. The incidence of trench fever was believed to
 have faded away with the end of World War I. It was
 not diagnosed in the United States until 1992, when 10
 cases were reported among homeless Seattle men.
 The related bacteria B. henselae was first identi
fied several years ago as the cause of cat-scratch fever.
 It also can lead to bacillary angiomatosis in AIDS
 patients. Bacillary angiomatosis caused by this bac
teria is transmitted to AIDS patients from cat fleas.
 These two different types of bacteria both cause
 bacillary angiomatosis, a disease which is character
ized by wildly proliferating blood vessels that form
 tumor-like masses in the skin and organs. The nodules
 that appear in bacillary angiomatosis are firm and
 don’t turn white when pressed. The lesions can occur
 anywhere on the body, in numbers ranging from one
 to 100. They are rarely found on palms of the hands,
 soles of the feet, or in the mouth. As the number of
 lesions increase, the patient may develop a high fever,
 sweats, chills, poor appetite, vomiting, and weight loss.
 If untreated, the infection may be fatal.
 In addition to the basic disease process, the two
 different types of bacteria cause some slightly different
 symptoms. Patients infected with B. henselae also  experience blood-filled cysts within the liver and
 abnormal liver function, whereas B. quintana patients
 may have tumor growths in the bone.
 Diagnosis
 This life-threatening but curable infection is often
 misdiagnosed, because it may be mistaken for other
 conditions (such as Kaposi’s sarcoma). A blood test
 developed in 1992 by the CDC detects antibodies to
 the bacteria. It can be confirmed by reviewing symp
toms, history and negative tests for other diseases that
 cause swollen lymph glands. It isn’t necessary to
 biopsy a small sample of the lymph node unless there
 is a question of cancer of the lymph node or some
 other disease.
 Treatment
 Recent research indicates that antibiotics used to
 treat other HIV opportunistic infections can both pre
vent and treat bacillary angiomatosis. Treatment is
 usually given until the lesions disappear, which typi
cally takes three or four weeks. A severely affected
 lymph node or blister may have to be drained, and a
 heating pad may help swollen, tender lymph glands.
 Acetaminophen (Tylenol) may relieve pain, aches, and
 fever over 1018F (38.38C).
 Prognosis
 In most cases, prompt antibiotic treatment in
 patients with AIDS cured the infection caused by
 either variety of the bacteria, and patients may resume
 normal life. Early diagnosis is crucial to a cure.
 Prevention
 Studies suggest that antibiotics may prevent
 the disease. Patients also should be sure to treat cats
 for fleas.