 Definition
 Bad breath, sometimes called halitosis, is an
 unpleasant odor of the breath.
 Description
 Bad breath is likely to be experienced by most
 adults at least occasionally. Bad breath, either real or
 imagined, can have a significant impact on a person’s
 social and professional life.
 Causes and symptoms
 Bad breath can be caused by a number of pro
blems. Oral diseases, fermentation of food particles in
 the mouth, sinus infections, and unclean dentures can
 all contribute to mouth odor. Manynon-oral diseases,
 such as lung infections, kidney failure, or severe liver
 disease, can also cause bad breath, though rarely.
 Many people think that bad breath can originate in
 the stomach or intestines; this is extremely rare. The
 esophagus is usually collapsed and closed, and,
 although abelch maycarryodorupfromthestomach,
 the chance of bad breath being caused from air con
tinually escaping from the stomach is remote.
 Cigarette smoke can cause bad breath, not only in
 the cigarette smoker, but also in one who is constantly
 exposed to second-hand smoke.
 Diagnosis
 Theeasiest waytodetermine if onehasbadbreath
 is to ask someone who is trustworthy and discrete.
  This is usually not too difficult. Another, more pri
vate, method ofdetermining if one has badbreath isto
 lick one’s wrist, wait until it dries, then smell the area.
 Scraping the rear area of the tongue with a plastic
 spoon, then smelling the spoon, is another method
 one can use to assess bad breath.
 Treatment
 The most effective treatment of bad breath is to
 treat the cause. Poor oral hygiene can be improved by
 regular brushing and flossing, as well as regular dental
 checkups. Gentle brushing of the tongue should be
 part of daily oral hygiene. In addition to good oral
 hygiene, the judicious use of mouthwashes is helpful.
 Mouthdryness,experienced at night or during fasting,
 or due to certain medications and medical conditions,
 can contribute to bad breath. Dryness can be avoided
 bydrinkingadequate amountsofwater.Chewinggum
 may be beneficial.
 As mentioned, some medications, such as some
 high blood pressure medications, can cause dry mouth.
 If this problem is significant, a medication change, under
 the supervision of one’s health care provider, may
 improve the dry-mouth condition. Oral or sinus infec
tions, once diagnosed, can be treated medically, usually
 with antibiotics. Lung infections and kidney or liver
 problems will, of course, need medical treatment.
 Alternative treatment
 Depending on the cause, a multitude of alterna
tive therapeutic remedies can be used. For example,
 sinusitis can be treated with steam inhalation of essen
tial oils and/or herbs.
 Prognosis
 Most bad breath can be treated successfully with
 good oral hygiene and/or medical care. Occasionally,
 forpatientswhofeelthatthesetherapiesareunsuccessful,
 somedelusional orobsessivebehavior pattern might per
tain, and mental health counseling may be appropriate.