Definition
 Balantidiasis is an infectious disease produced by
 a single-celled microorganism (protozoan) called
 Balantidium coli that infects the digestive tract. It is
 primarily a disease of the tropics, although it is also
 found in cooler, temperate climates. Most persons
 with balantidiasis do not exhibit any noticeable symp
toms (asymptomatic), but a few individuals will
 develop diarrhea with blood and mucus and an
 inflamed colon (colitis).
 Description
 Balantidiasis is caused by Balantidium coli, a para
sitic protozoan that infects the large intestine. B. coli is
 the largest and only protozoan, having cilia or hair
like structures, that is capable of causing disease in  humans. Balantidiasis occurs most commonly in areas
 with poor sanitation and in settings where humans live
 in close contact with pigs, sheep, or goats.
 Causes and symptoms
 Balantidiasis is transmittedprimarily byeatingfood
 ordrinkingwaterthathasbeencontaminatedbyhuman
 or animal feces containing B. coli cysts. During its life
 cycle, thisorganismexistsintwoverydifferentforms:the
 infective cyst or capsuled form, which cannot move but
 can survive outside the human body because ofitsthick,
 protective covering; and the disease-producing form,the
 trophozoite, which although capable of moving, cannot
 survive once excreted in the feces and, therefore, cannot
 infect others. In the digestive tract, the cysts are trans
ported to the intestine where the walls of the cysts are
 brokenopenbydigestivesecretions,releasingthemobile
 trophozoites. Once released within the intestine, the tro
phozoitesmultiplybyfeedingonintestinalbacteriaorby
 invadingtheliningofthelargeintestine.Withinthelining
 ofthelargeintestine,thetrophozoitessecreteasubstance
 thatdestroysintestinaltissueandcreatessores(ulcers)or
 abscesses. Trophozoites eventually form new cysts that
 arecarriedthroughthedigestivetractandexcretedinthe
 feces. Underfavorabletemperatureandhumiditycondi
tions, the cysts can survive in soil or water for weeks to
 months, ready to begin the cycle again.
 Most individuals with balantidiasis have no
 noticeable symptoms. Even though these individuals
 may not feel ill, they are still capable of infecting
 others by person-to-person contact or by contaminat
ing food orwaterwith cysts that others may ingest, for
 example, by preparing food with unwashed hands.
 The most common symptoms of balantidiasis are
 chronic diarrhea or severe colitis with abdominal
 cramps, pain, and bloody stools. Complications may
 include intestinal perforation in which the intestinal
 wall becomes torn, but the organisms do not spread to
 other parts of the body in the blood stream.
 Diagnosis
 Diagnosis of balantidiasis, as with other similar
 diseases, can be complicated, partly because symp
toms may or may not be present. A diagnosis of
 balantidiasis may be considered when a patient has
 diarrhea combined with a possible history of recent
 exposure to amebiasis through travel, contact with
 infected persons, or anal intercourse.
 Specifically, a diagnosis of balantidiasis is made
 by finding B. coli cysts or trophozoites in the patient’s
 stools or by finding trophozoites in tissue samples
 (biopsy) taken from the large bowel. A diagnostic
 blood test has not yet been developed.
 Stool examination
 This test involves microscopically examining a
 stool sample for the presence of cysts and/or tropho
zoites of B. coli.
 Sigmoidoscopy
 To take a tissue sample from the large intestine, a
 procedure called a sigmoidoscopy is performed.
 During a sigmoidoscopy, a thin, flexible instrument
 is used to visually examine the intestinal lining and
 obtain small tissue specimens.
 Treatment
 Patients with balantidiasis are treated with pre
scription medication, typically consisting of a ten day
 course of either tetracycline or metronidazole.
 Alternative drugs that have proven effective in treat
ing balantidiasis include iodoquinol or paromomycin.
 Prognosis
 Although somewhat dependent on the patient’s
 overall health, in general, the prognosis for most patients with balantidiasis is good. Severely infected
 patients occasionally die as a result of a tear in the
 intestinal wall (intestinal perforation) and consequent
 loss of blood.
 Prevention
 Therearenoimmunizationproceduresormedica
tions that can be taken prior to potential exposure to
 prevent balantidiasis. Moreover, people who have had
 the disease can become reinfected. Prevention requires
 effective personal and community hygiene. Specific
 safeguards include the following:
 Purification of drinking water. Water can be purified
 by filtering, boiling, or treatment with iodine.
 Proper food handling. Measures include protecting
 food from contamination by flies, cooking food
 properly, washing one’s hands after using the bath
room and before cooking or eating, and avoiding
 foods that cannot be cooked or peeled when travel
ing in countries with high rates of balantidiasis.
 Careful disposal of human feces.
 Monitoring the contacts of balantidiasis patients.
 The stools of family members and sexual partners
 of infected persons should be tested for the presence
 of cysts or trophozoites.