 Definition
 Barbiturates are medicines that act on the central
 nervous system and cause drowsiness and can control
 seizures.
Purpose
 Barbiturates
 Barbiturates are in the group of medicines known
 as central nervous system depressants (CNS). Also
 known as sedative-hypnotic drugs, barbiturates make
 people very relaxed, calm, and sleepy. These drugs are
 sometimes used to help patients relax before surgery.
 Some may also be used to control seizures (convul
sions). Although barbiturates have been used to treat
 nervousness and sleep problems, they have generally
 been replaced by other medicines for these purposes.
 These medicines may become habit forming and
 should not be used to relieve everyday anxiety and
 tension or to treat sleeplessness over long periods.
 Description
 Barbiturates are available only with a physician’s
 prescription and are sold in capsule, tablet, liquid,
 and injectable forms. Some commonly used barbitu
rates are phenobarbital (Barbita) and secobarbital
 (Seconal).
 Recommended dosage
 Recommended dosage depends on the type of
 barbiturate and other factors such as the patient’s
 age and the condition for which the medicine is being
 taken. Check with the physician who prescribed the
 drug or the pharmacist who filled the prescription for
 the correct dosage.
 Always take barbiturates exactly as directed.
 Never take larger or more frequent doses, and do
 not take the drug for longer than directed. If the
 medicine does not seem to be working, even after
 taking it for several weeks, do not increase the
 dosage. Instead, check with the physician who pre
scribed the medicine.
 Do not stop taking this medicine suddenly with
out first checking with the physician who prescribed it.
 It may benecessary to taper down gradually to reduce
 the chance of withdrawal symptoms. If it is necessary
 to stop taking the drug, check with the physician for
 instructions on how to stop.
 Precautions
 See a physician regularly while taking barbitu
rates. The physician will check to make sure the med
icine is working as it should and will note unwanted
 side effects.
 Because barbiturates work on the central nervous
 system, they may add to the effects of alcohol and other drugs that slow the central nervous system,
 such as antihistamines, cold medicine, allergy medi
cine, sleep aids, medicine for seizures, tranquilizers,
 some pain relievers, and muscle relaxants. They may
 also add to the effects of anesthetics, including those
 used for dental procedures. The combined effects of
 barbiturates and alcohol or other CNS depressants
 (drugs that slow the central nervous system) can be
 very dangerous, leading to unconsciousness or even
 death. Anyone taking barbiturates should not drink
 alcohol and should check with his or her physician
 before taking any medicines classified as CNS
 depressants.
 Taking an overdose of barbiturates or combining
 barbiturates with alcohol or other central nervous
 system depressants can cause unconsciousness and
 even death. Anyone who shows signs of an overdose
 or a reaction to combining barbiturates with alcohol or other drugs should get emergency medical help
 immediately. Signs include:
 severe drowsiness
 breathing problems
 slurred speech
 staggering
 slow heartbeat
 severe confusion
 severe weakness
 Barbiturates may change the results of certain
 medical tests. Before having medical tests, anyone
 taking this medicine should alert the health care pro
fessional in charge.
 People may feel drowsy, dizzy, lightheaded, or
 less alert when using these drugs. These effects may
 even occur the morning after taking a barbiturate
 at bedtime. Because of these possible effects, any
one who takes these drugs should not drive, use
 machines or do anything else that might be dan
gerous until they have found out how the drugs
 affect them.
 Barbiturates may cause physical or mental depen
dence when taken over long periods. Anyone who
 shows these signs of dependence should check with
 his or her physician right away:
 the need to take larger and larger doses of the med
icine to get the same effect
 a strong desire to keep taking the medicine
 withdrawal symptoms, such as anxiety, nausea or
 vomiting, convulsions, trembling, or sleep problems,
 when the medicine is stopped
 Children may be especially sensitive to barbitu
rates. This may increase the chance of side effects such
 as unusual excitement.
 Older people may also be more sensitive that
 others to the effects of this medicine. In older people,
 barbiturates may be more likely to cause confusion,
 depression, and unusual excitement. These effects are
 also more likely in people who are very ill.
 Special conditions
 People with certain medical conditions or who are
 taking certain other medicines can have problems if
 they take barbiturates. Before taking these drugs, be
 sure to let the physician know about any of these
 conditions:
 ALLERGIES. Anyone who has had unusual reac
tions to barbiturates in the past should let his or her
 physician know before taking the drugs again. The
 physician should also be told about any allergies to
 foods, dyes, preservatives, or other substances.
 PREGNANCY. Taking barbiturates during preg
nancy increases the chance of birth defects and may
 cause other problems such as prolonged labor and
 withdrawal effects in the baby after birth. Pregnant
 womenwhomusttake barbiturates for serious or life
threatening conditions should thoroughly discuss with
 their physicians the benefits and risks of taking this
 medicine.
 BREASTFEEDING. Barbiturates pass into breast
 milk and may cause problems such as drowsiness,
 breathing problems, or slow heartbeat in nursing
 babies whose mothers take the medicine. Women
 who are breastfeeding should check with their physi
cians before using barbiturates.
 OTHERMEDICALCONDITIONS. Beforeusingbarbi
turates, people with any of these medical problems
 should make sure their physicians are aware of their
 conditions:
 alcohol or drug abuse
 depression
 hyperactivity (in children)
 pain
 kidney disease
 liver disease
 diabetes
 overactive thyroid
 underactive adrenal gland
 chronic lung diseases such as asthma or emphysema
 severe anemia
 porphyria
 USE OF CERTAIN MEDICINES. Taking barbiturates
 with certain other drugs may affect the way the drugs
 work or may increase the chance of side effects.
 Side effects
 The most common side effects are dizziness, light
headedness, drowsiness, and clumsiness or unsteadiness.
 These problems usually go away as the body adjusts to
 the drug and do not require medical treatment unless
 they persist or interfere with normal activities.
 More serious side effects are not common, but
 may occur. If any of the following side effects occur,
 check with the physician who prescribed the medicine
 immediately: 
 fever
 Bariatric surgery
 muscle or joint pain
 sore throat
 chest pain or tightness in the chest
 wheezing
 skin problems, such as rash, hives, or red, thickened,
 or scaly skin
 bleeding sores on the lips
 sores or painful white spots in the mouth
 swollen eyelids, face, or lips
 In addition, check with a physician as soon as
 possible if confusion, depression, or unusual excite
ment occur after taking barbiturates.
 Patients who take barbiturates for a long time or
 at high doses may notice side effects for some time
 after they stop taking the drug. These effects usually
 appear within 8-16 hours after the patient stops taking
 the medicine. Check with a physician if these or other
 troublesome symptomsoccurafterstoppingtreatment
 with barbiturates:
 dizziness, lightheadedness or faintness
 anxiety or restlessness
 hallucinations
 vision problems
 nausea and vomiting
 seizures (convulsions)
 muscle twitches or trembling hands
 weakness
 sleep problems, nightmares, or increased dreaming
 Other side effects may occur. Anyone who has
 unusual symptoms during or after treatment with bar
biturates should get in touch with his or her physician.
 Interactions
 Birth control pills may not work properly when
 taken while barbiturates are being taken. To prevent
 pregnancy, use additional or additional methods of
 birth control while taking barbiturates.
 Barbiturates may also interact with other medicines.
 Whenthishappens,theeffectsofoneorbothofthedrugs
 may change or the risk of side effects may be greater.
 Anyone who takes barbiturates should let the physician
 know all other medicines he or she is taking. Among the
 drugs that may interact with barbiturates are:
 Other central nervous system (CNS) depressants
 such as medicine for allergies, colds, hay fever, and
 asthma; sedatives; tranquilizers; prescription pain
 medicine; muscle relaxants; medicine for seizures;
 sleep aids; barbiturates; and anesthetics.
 Blood thinners.
 Adrenocorticoids (cortisone-like medicines).
 Antiseizure medicines such as valproic acid (Depakote
 and Depakene), and carbamazepine (Tegretol).
 The list above does not include every drug that
 may interact with barbiturates. Be sure to check with
 a physician or pharmacist before combining barbitu
rates with any other prescription or nonprescription
 (over-the-counter) medicine.