 Definition
 Bariatric surgery promotes weight loss by chan
ging the digestive system’s anatomy, limiting the
 amount of food that can be eaten and digested.
 Purpose
 Obesity normally is defined through the use of
 body mass index (BMI) measurement. Physician
 offices, obesity associations, nutritionists, and others
 offer methods for calculating BMI, which is acompar
ison of height to weight. Those with a BMI of 30 or
 higher are considered obese. However, at 40 or higher,
 they are considered severely obese—approximately
 about 100 pounds overweight for men and 80 pounds
 overweight for women.
 Many people who are obese struggle to lose
 weight through diet and exercise but fail. Only after
 they have tried other methods of losing weight will
 they be candidates for bariatric surgery, which today
 is considered a ‘‘last resort’’ for weight loss. In general,
 guidelines agree that those with a BMI of 40 or more,
 or a BMI of 35 to 39.9 and a serious obesity-related  health problem, qualify for bariatric surgery. More
 than 23 million Americans are candidates for bariatric
 surgery. More than 100,000 of the procedures were
 performed in 2003 and the number of surgeries per
formed will probably continue to rise for many years.
 Precautions
 Bariatric surgery is not for everyone and the
 surgeon and other physicians will evaluate all med
ical conditions before allowing a patient to pro
ceed. As a major surgery, there are associated
 risks and side effects. Women of childbearing age
 should be aware that rapid weight loss and nutri
tional deficiency associatedwithbariatric surgery
 may be harmful to a developing fetus. It is impor
tant that a patient reveal all current medications
 and conditions during any pre-operative discus
sions or examinations. Also, the physician will
 carefully evaluate the patient to ensure that he or
 she is prepared to make a lifelong commitment to
 the changes in eating and lifestyle required to make
 the surgery successful.
 Though many studies have shown general safety
 associated with the major surgeries, they are relatively
 newandresearch on long-term effects are not as wide
spread as they are for many other surgeries and pro
cedures. When choosing a surgeon to perform the
 operation, patients should check with organizations
 such as the American Society for Bariatric Surgery
 for certification. A patient also should ask about the
 surgeon’s experience in performing the particular
 operation.
 Although the number of obese teenagers and
 resulting bariatric surgeries has increased, some
 experts are questioning the decision to perform
 bariatric surgery on teens. There are no specific clin
ical guidelines for determining a safe age for the
 procedure, but some physicians agree that bariatric
 surgery is not appropriate for children younger than
 age 15, since they are still growing and forming
 bones.
 Description
 When food is chewed and swallowed, it moves
 along the digestive tract. In the stomach, a strong
 acid helps break down food so it can be digested
 and the body can absorb the food’s nutrients and
 calories. The stomach can hold about three pints
 of food at one time. As digestion continues, food
 particles become smaller and move from the stomach
 into the intestine. The various parts of the small
 intestine are nearly 20 feet long if laid out straight.
 Those food particles not digested in the small intes
tine are stored in the large intestine until they are
 eliminated as waste.
 When a patient has bariatric surgery, this diges
tive process is altered to help the patient lose weight.
 There are three main types of bariatric surgery, but
 only two types are commonly used today. The types
 are restrictive, malabsorptive, and combined restric
tive/malabsorptive.
 Restrictive surgery, often referred to as ‘‘sto
mach stapling’’ uses bands or staples to create a
 small pouch at the top of the stomach where food
 enters from the esophagus. This smaller pouch may
 hold only about 1 ounce of food at first and may
 stretch to hold about 2-3 ounces. The pouch’s
 lower opening is made small, so that food moves
 slowly to the lower part of the stomach, adding to
 the feeling of fullness. The most frequently per
formed types of restrictive surgeries are vertical
 banded gastroplasty (VBG), gastric banding, and
 laparoscopic gastric banding. VBG is used less
 today in favor of gastric banding, which involves
 an adjustable hollow band made of silicone rubber.
 Laparoscopic gastric banding, or Lap-band, was
 approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
 (FDA) in 2001. Sometimes referred to as ‘‘minimally
 invasive’’ bariatric surgery, the surgeon uses small
 incisions and a laparoscope, or a small, tubular instru
ment with a camera attached, to see inside the abdo
men and apply the band.
 Malabsorptive procedures help patients lose
 weight by limiting the amount of nutrients and cal
ories the intestine can absorb. Sometimes called intest
inal bypasses, they are no longer used in the United
 States because they have often resulted in severe nutri
tional deficiencies.
 Combined restrictive/malabsorptive operations
 are the most common bariatric surgeries. They work  by restricting both the amount of food the stomach
 can hold and the amount of calories and nutrients the
 body absorbs. The most common and successful com
bined surgery in recent years is called the Roux-en-Y
 gastric bypass (RGB). In this operation, the surgeon
 first creates a small pouch at the top of the stomach.
 Next, a Y-shaped section of the small intestine is con
nected to the small pouch, allowing food to bypass the
 lower stomach, the first part of the small intestine
 (duodenum), and the first portion of the next section
 of the small intestine (jejunum). It connects into the
 second half of the jejunum, reducing the amount of
 calories and nutrients the body absorbs. RGB may be
 performed with a laparoscope and a series of tiny
 incisions or with a large abdominal incision.
 Procedure times vary, depending on the type of
 bariatric surgery chosen. However, most patients are
 in surgery for about one to two hours. Though costs
 can be as high as $35,000, more insurance companies
 are beginning to pay for the procedures if they are
 proven medically necessary. In 2004, the agency that
 pays for Medicare costs recognized obesity and many
 of its treatments as a medical cost for the first time,
 recognizing that obesity leads to many other medical
 problems.
 Preparation
 Thephysicianwillfirstmakesurethatapatientis
 mentally prepared for the surgery and the commit
ment to follow-up care that will be required. Patients
 should have a consultation appointment with the
 surgeon prior to the procedure to discuss risks and
 benefits. Pre-operative instructions will be given that
 will tell the patient specific preparations prior to the
 surgery. These may include instructions about avoid
ing food or liquids, certain medications, and other
 instructions on the day before or the day of the pro
cedure. Patients also may have several laboratory or
 other diagnostic tests prior to the surgery.
 Aftercare
 Depending on the type of procedure and any pos
sible complications, patients can expect to stay at the
 hospital or surgery center for about two to four days
 following the surgery. Those who have laparoscopic
 operations typically have shorter hospital stays and
 speedier recovery times. The physician and nurses will
 provide instructions for wound care and other follow
up when the patient is discharged from the hospital.
 Usually, bariatric surgery patients can resume normal
 activity within about six weeks following surgery, and
 as little as two weeks after laparoscopic procedures. It
 is important for bariatric surgery patients to lose
 weight at the recommended pace, take nutritional sup
plements as recommended, and attend follow-up visits
 with physicians and nutritionists.
 How a patient complies with instructions from
 physicians following bariatric surgery is important.
 Most patients will require lifelong use of nutritional
 supplementssuchasmultivitamins,calcium,andother
 vitamin supplements to prevent nutritional deficien
cies. Because the stomach is smaller, patients will have
 to eat small portions of food and often must avoid
 certain types of food such as sugar.
 Risks
 The surgeon performing the procedure should
 discuss its specific risks prior to surgery. Risks for
 bariatric surgery include infection, blood clots, abdom
inal hernia, gallstones, nutritional deficiencies, possi
ble nerve complications, and death. Death rates have
 been reported lowest for RGB and VBG, at less than
 1%ofpatients.
 Normal results
 Weight loss will occur gradually, as patients can
 eat less food and absorb fewer calories. When patients
 follow post-operative instructions, they can lead nor
mal lives, eating less food and being careful to limit
 certain foods that may irritate their new stomach
 pouches. Most patients will lose 50–60% of their
 excess weight in the first year or two. With gastric
 bypass surgery, many can lose up to two-thirds of
 excess weight by the second postoperative year.