 Definition
 Bartonellosis is an infectious bacterial disease
 with an acute form (which has a sudden onset and
 short course) and a chronic form (which has more
 gradual onset and longer duration). The disease is
 transmitted by sandflies and occurs in western South
 America. Characterized by a form of red blood cell
 deficiency (hemolytic anemia) and fever, the poten
tially fatal acute form is called Oroya fever or
 Carrion’s disease. The chronic form is identified by
 painful skin lesions.
 Description
 Theacuteformofthediseasegetsits name froman
 outbreak that occurred in 1871 near La Oroya, Peru.
 More than 7,000 people perished. Some survivors later
 developed a skin disease, called verruga peruana
 (Peruvian warts). These skin lesions were observed
 prior to the 1871 outbreak–perhaps as far back as the
 pre-Columbian era–but a connection to Oroya fever
 was unknown. In 1885, a young medical researcher,
 Daniel Carrion, inoculated himself with blood from a
 lesion to study the course of the skin disease. When he
 became ill with Oroya fever, the connection became
 apparent. Oroya fever is often called Carrion’s disease
 in honor of his fatal experiment.  Thebacteria, Bartonella bacilliformis, was isolated
 by Alberto Barton in 1909, but wasn’t identified as the
 cause of the fever until 1940. The Bartonella genus
 includes at least 11 bacteria species, four of which
 cause human diseases, including cat-scratch disease
 and bacillary angiomatosis. However, bartonellosis
 refers exclusively to the disease caused by B. bacillifor
mis. The disease is limited to a small area of the Andes
 Mountains in western South America; nearly all cases
 have been in Peru, Colombia, and Ecuador. A large
 outbreak involving thousands of people occurred in
 1940–41, but bartonellosis has since occurred sporadi
cally. Control ofsandflies, the onlyknowndiseasecarrier
 (vector), has been credited with managing the disease.
 Causes and symptoms
 Bartonellosis is transmitted by the nocturnal
 sandfly and arises from infection with B. bacilliformis.
 The sandfly, Lutzomyia verrucarum, dines on human
 blood and, in so doing, can inject bacteria into the
 bloodstream. The sandfly is found only in certain
 areas ofthePeruvianAndes;other,as-yet-unidentified
 vectors are suspected in Ecuador and Colombia.
 Once in the bloodstream, the bacteria latch onto
 red blood cells (erythrocytes), burrow into the cells,
 and reproduce. In the process, up to 90% of the host’s
 erythrocytes are destroyed, causing severe hemolytic
 anemia. The anemia is accompanied by high fever,
 muscle and joint pain, delirium, and possibly coma.
 Two to eight weeks after the acute phase, an
 infected individual develops verruga peruana. However,
 individuals may exhibit the characteristic lesions with
out ever experiencing the acute phase. Left untreated,
 the lesions may last months or years. These lesions
 resemble blood-filled blisters, up to 1.6 in (4 cm) in
 diameter, and appear primarily on the headand limbs.
 They can be painful to the touch and may bleed or
 ulcerate.
 Diagnosis
 Bartonellosis is identified by symptoms and the
 patient’s history, such as recent travel in areas where
 bartonellosis occurs. Isolation of B. bacilliformis from
 the bloodstream or lesions can confirm the diagnosis.
 Treatment
 Antibiotics are the mainstay of bartonellosis treat
ment.Thebacteriaaresusceptibletoseveralantibiotics,
 including chloramphenicol, penicillins,andaminoglyco
sides. Blood transfusions may be necessary to treat the
 anemia caused by bartonellosis.
 Prognosis
 Antibiotics have dramatically decreased the fatal
ity associated with bartonellosis. Prior to the develop
ment ofantibiotics, the fever was fatal in 40% of cases.
 With antibiotic treatment, that rate has dropped to
 8%.Fatalitiescanresultfromcomplicationsassociated
 with severe anemia and secondary infections. Once
 the infection is halted, an individual can recover fully.
 Prevention
 Avoiding sandfly bites is the primary means of
 prevention. Sandfly eradication programs have been
 helpful in decreasing the sandfly population, and insect
 repellant can be effective in preventing sandfly bites.