 Definition
 Bereavement refers to the period of mourning and
 grief following the death of a beloved person or ani
mal. The English word bereavement comes from an
 ancient Germanic root word meaning ‘‘to rob’’ or ‘‘to
 seize by violence.’’ Mourning is the word that is used to
 describe the public rituals or symbols of bereavement,
 such as holding funeral services, wearing black cloth
ing, closing a place of business temporarily, or low
ering a flag to half mast. Grief refers to one’s personal
 experience of loss; it includes physical symptoms as
 well as emotional and spiritual reactions to the loss.
 While public expressions of mourning are usually
 time-limited, grief is a process that takes most people
 several months or years to work through.
 Description
 Bereavement is a highly individual as well as a
 complex experience. It is increasingly recognized that
 no two people respond the same way to the losses
 associated with the death of a loved one. People’s
 reactions to a death are influenced by such factors
 as ethnic or religious traditions; personal beliefs
 about life after death; the type of relationship ended
 by death (relative, friend, colleague, etc.); the cause of
 death; the person’s age at death; whether the death
 was sudden or expected; and many others. In addi
tion, the death of a loved one inevitably confronts
 adults (and older adolescents) with the fact that they
 too will die. As a result of this variety and emotional
 complexity, most doctors and other counselors advise
 people to trust their own feelings about bereave
ment,0 and grieve in the way that seems most helpful
 to them.
 It is also increasingly understood in the early
 2000s that people can experience bereavement with
 regard to other losses. Some examples of these so-called ‘‘silent losses’’ include miscarriages in early
 pregnancy, the death of a child in the womb shortly
 before birth, or the news that a loved one has
 Alzheimer’s disease or another illness that slowly
 destroys their personality. In addition, many counse
lors recognize that bereavement has two dimensions,
 the actual loss and the symbolic losses. For example, a
 person whose teenage son or daughter is killed in an
 accident suffers a series of symbolic losses—knowing
 that their child will never graduate from high school,
 get married, or have children—as well as the actual
 loss of the adolescent to death.
 Causes and symptoms
 Causes
 The immediate cause of bereavement is usually
 the death of a loved friend or relative. There are a
 The loved one was an animal rather than a human
 being. Western societies are only beginning to accept
 that adults as well as children can grieve for a dead
 animal; many adults still feel that there is ‘‘some
thing wrong’’ about grieving for their pet. The ques
tion of euthanasia may be an additional source of
 sorrow; even when the pet is terminally ill, many
 people are very uneasy about making the decision
 to end its life.
 Symptoms
 Bereavement typically affects a person’s physical
 well-being as well as emotions. Common symptoms of
 grief include changes in appetite and weight, fatigue,
 insomnia and other sleep disturbances, loss of interest
 in sex, low energy levels, nausea and vomiting, chest or
 throat pain, and headache. People who have lost a
 loved one in traumatic circumstances may have such
 symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder as an exag
gerated startle response, visual or auditory hallucina
tions, or high levels of muscular tension.
 Doctors and other counselors have identified four
 stages or phases in uncomplicated bereavement:
  Shock, disbelief, feelings of numbness. This initial
 phase lasts about two weeks, during which the
 bereaved person finally accepts the reality of the
 loved one’s death.
 Suffering the pain of grief. This phase typically lasts
 for several months. Some people undergo a mild
 temporary depression about six months after the
 loved one’s death.
 Adjusting to life without the loved one. In this phase
 of bereavement, survivors may find themselves
 taking on the loved one’s roles and responsibilities
 as well as redefining their own identities.
 Moving forward with life, forming new relation
ships, and having positive expectations of the future.
 Most people reach this stage within one to two years
 after the loved one’s death.
 BEREAVEMENT IN CHILDREN. Children do not
 experience bereavement in the same way as adolescents
 and adults. Preschool children usually do not under
standdeathasfinalandirreversible,andmaytalkoract
 as if the dead pet or family member will wake up or
 come back. Children between the ages of five and nine
 are better able to understand the finality of death, but
 they tend to assume it will not affect them or their
 family. They are likely to be shocked and severely
 upset by a death in their immediate family. In addition
 to the physical disturbances that bereaved adults often
 experience, children sometimes begin to act like infants
 again (wanting bottle feeding, using baby talk, etc.)
 This pattern of returning to behaviors characteristic of
 an earlier life stage is called regression.
 TRAUMATIC AND COMPLICATED GRIEF. Since the
 early 1990s, thanatologists (doctors and other counse
lors who specialize in issues related to death and
 dying) have identified two types of grief that do not
 resolve normally with the passage of time. Traumatic
 grief is defined as grief resulting from a sudden trau
matic event that involves violent suffering, mutilation,
 and/or multiple deaths; appears to be random or pre
ventable; and often involves the survivor’s own brush
 with death. The symptoms of traumatic grief are simi
lar to those of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
 Such events as the terrorist attacks of September 11,
 2001, the East Asian tsunami of December 2004, and
 airplane crashes or other transportation disasters may
 produce traumatic grief in survivors.
 In contrast to traumatic grief, complicated grief
 does notnecessarily result from a specific type of event
 but rather refers to an abnormally intense and pro
longed response to bereavement. While most people
 are able to move through aperiod of bereavement and
 recover a sense of purpose and meaning in life, people
 with complicated grief feel as if their entire worldview
 has been shattered. They cannot stop thinking of the
 dead person, long to be with him or her, and may feel
 that part of them died along with the loved one. They
 sometimes start acting like the deceased person,
 mimicking the symptoms of his or her illness, behav
ing in reckless ways, talking about ‘‘joining’’ the loved
 one, or refusing to accept the reality of the death.
 In general they are unable to function normally.
 Complicated grief should not be regarded as simply  a subtype of clinical depression; the two conditions
 may coexist or overlap in some patients but are none
theless distinct entities.
 Diagnosis
 Bereavement is considered a normal response to a
 death or other loss. A doctor who suspects that a
 patient is suffering from traumatic or complicated
 grief, however, may use various psychological inven
tories or questionnaires to see whether the patient
 meets the criteria for PTSD, major depression, or
 acute stress disorder. In addition, there are several spe
cific questionnaires to help diagnose complicated grief.
 Treatment
 Most people do not require formal treatment
 for bereavement. In the early 2000s, however, many
 people choose to participate in support groups for
 recently bereaved people or hospicefollow-up programs
 for relatives of patients who died in that hospice.
 Bereavement support groups are particularly helpful in
 guiding members through such common but painful
 problems as disposing of the dead person’s possessions,
 celebrating holidays without the loved one, coping with
 anniversaries, etc.
 Traumatic grief is usually treated in the same way
 as post-traumatic stress, with temporary use of medi
cations to control sleep disturbances and anxiety
 symptoms along with long-term psychotherapy.
 Those suffering from traumatic grief may also be
 referred to support groups of people dealing with the
 same type of sudden and violent loss. Some of these
 organizations are listed below. Complicated grief is
 usually managed with a combination of group and
 individual psychotherapy.
 Alternative treatment
 Alternative therapies that have been reported to
 help with the sleep disturbances and other physical
 symptoms of bereavement include prayer and medita
tion; such movement therapies as yoga and tai chi;
 therapeutic touch, Reiki, and other forms of biofield
 healing; bibliotherapy and journaling; music therapy,
 art therapy, hydrotherapy,andmassage therapy.
 Prognosis
 Most people move through the stages of the nor
mal grief process within several months to two years,
 depending on the length and closeness of the relation
ship. Traumatic grief and complicated grief, however,
 may take three years or longer to resolve, even with
 appropriate treatment.
 Prevention
 Bereavement is considered a normal response to
 death and loss, which are universal human experi
ences. It should ordinarily be allowed to run its course;
 most counselors maintain that trying to stifle or cut
 short the grief process is more likely to cause emo
tional problems later on than to prevent them.