 Definition
 Berylliosis is lung inflammation caused by inhal
ing dust or fumes that contain the metallic element
 beryllium. Found in rocks, coal, soil, and volcanic
 dust, beryllium is used in the aerospace industry and
 in many types of manufacturing. Berylliosis occurs in
 both acute and chronic forms. In some cases, appear
ance of the disease may bedelayed as muchas20years
 after exposure to beryllium.
 Description
 In the 1930s, scientists discovered that beryllium
 could make fluorescent light bulbs last longer. During
 the following decade, the hard, grayish metal was
 identified as the cause of a potentially debilitating,
 sometimes deadly disease characterized by shortness
 of breath and inflammation, swelling, and scarring of
 the lungs.
 The manufacture of fluorescent light bulbs is no
 longer a source of beryllium exposure, but serious
 health hazards are associated with any work  environment or process in which beryllium fumes or
 particles become airborne. Working with pure beryl
lium, beryllium compounds (e.g. beryllium oxide), or
 beryllium alloys causes occupational exposure. So do
 jobs involving:
 electronics
 fiber optics
 manufacturing ceramics, bicycle frames, golf clubs,
 mirrors, and microwave ovens
 mining
 nuclear weapons and reactors
 reclaiming scrap metal
 space and atomic engineering
 dental and laboratory technology
 Beryllium dust andfumesareclassified astoxic air
 pollutants by the Environmental Protection Agency
 (EPA). It is estimated that 2–6% of workers exposed
 to these contaminants eventually develop berylliosis.
 Causes and symptoms
 Coughing, shortness of breath, and weight loss
 that begin abruptly can be a symptom of acute ber
ylliosis. This condition is caused by beryllium air pol
lution that inflames the lungs making themrigid;itcan
 affect the eyes and skin as well. People who have acute
 berylliosis are usually very ill. Most recover, but some
 die of the disease.
 Chronic berylliosis is an allergic reaction to long
term exposure to even low levels of beryllium dust or
 fumes. A systemic disease that causes formation of
 abnormal lung tissue and enlargement of the lymph
 nodes, chronic berylliosis also may affect other parts
 of the body. The symptoms of chronic berylliosis are largely the same as those seen in acute berylliosis, but
 they develop more slowly.
 Diagnosis
 Berylliosis is initially suspected if a patient with
 symptoms of the disease has a history of beryllium
 exposure. A chest x ray shows characteristic changes
 in the lungs. However, since these changes can resem
ble those caused by other lung diseases, further testing
 may be necessary.
 The beryllium lymphocyte proliferation test
 (BeLPT), a blood test that can detect beryllium sensi
tivity (i.e. an allergic reaction to beryllium), is used to
 screen individuals at risk of developing berylliosis.
 When screening results reveal a high level of sensitiv
ity, BeLPT is performed on cells washed from the
 lungs. This test is now considered the most definitive
 diagnostic test for berylliosis.
 Treatment
 Individuals with beryllium sensitivity or early
stage berylliosis should be transferred from tasks
 that involve beryllium exposure and regularly exam
ined to determine whether the disease has progressed.
 Acuteberylliosis is a serious disease that occasion
ally may be fatal. Ventilators can help patients with
 acute berylliosis breathe. Prompt corticosteroid ther
apy is required to lessen lung inflammation.
 Chronic beryllium disease is incurable.
 Corticosteroid therapy is often prescribed, but it is
 not certain that steroids can alter the progression of
 the disease, and they have no effect on scarring of lung
 tissue. Cleansing the lungs of beryllium is a slow pro
cess, so long-term therapy may be required. Chelation
 therapy is currently under investigation as a treatment
 for the disease.
 Prognosis
 Most patients with acute berylliosis recover fully
 7–10 days after treatment begins, and the disease
 usually causes no after effects.
 Patients whose lungs are severely damaged by
 chronic berylliosis may experience fatal heart failure
 because of the strain placed on the heart.
 Prevention
 Eliminating exposure to beryllium is the surest way
 to prevent berylliosis. Screening workers who are
 exposed to beryllium fumes or dust or who develop an
 allergic reaction to these substances is an effective way
 to control symptoms and prevent disease progression.