 Definition
 Humans can be injured by the bites or stings of
 many kinds of animals, including mammals such as
 dogs, cats, and fellow humans; arthropods such as spiders, bees, and wasps; snakes; and marine animals
 such as jellyfish and stingrays.
 Description
 Mammals
 DOGS. In the United States, where the dog popula
tion exceeds 50 million, dogs surpass all other mammals
 in the number of bites inflicted on humans. However,
 most dog-bite injuries are minor. A telephone survey of
 U.S. households conducted in 1994 led researchers to
 estimate that 3,737,000 dog bites not requiring medical
 attention occurred in the United States that year, versus
 757,000 that required medical treatment. Studies also
 show that most dog bites are from pets or other dogs
 known to the bitten person, that males are more likely
 than females to be bitten, and that children face a greater
 risk than adults. Each year, about 10-20 Americans,
 mostly children under 10 years of age, are killed by dogs.
 Dogbitesresultinanestimated340,000emergency
 room visits annually throughout the United States.
 More than half of the bites seen by emergency depart
ments occur at home. Children under 10 years old,
 especially boys between 5 and 9 years of age, are more
 likely than older people to visit an emergency room for
 bite treatment. Children under 10 years old were also
 much more liable to be bitten on the face, neck, and
 head. Nearly all of the injuries suffered by people seek
ing treatment in emergency rooms were of ‘‘low sever
ity,’’ and most were treated and released without being
 admitted to the hospital or sent to another facility.
 Many of the bites resulted from people attempting to
 break up fights between animals.
 CATS. Although cats are found in nearly a third of
 U.S. households, cat bites are far less common than
 dog bites. According to one study, cats inflict perhaps
 400,000 harmful bites in the United States each year.
 The tissue damage caused by cat bites is usually lim
ited, but they carry a high risk of infection. Whereas
 the infection rate for dog bite injuries is 15-20%, the
 infection rate for cat bites is 30-40%.
 HUMANS. Bites from mammals other than dogs
 and cats are uncommon, with one exception—human
 bites. There are approximately 70,000 human bites
 each year in the United States. Because the human
 mouth contains a multitude of potentially harmful
 microorganisms, human bites are more infectious
 than those of most other animals.
 Arthropods
 Arthropods are invertebrates belonging to the phy
lum Arthropoda, which includes insects, arachnids, crustaceans, and other subgroups. There are more than
 700,000 species in all. The list of arthropods that bite or
 stinghumansisextensiveandincludeslice,bedbugs,fleas,
 mosquitoes, black flies, ants, chiggers, ticks, centipedes,
 scorpions,andotherspecies.Spiders,bees,andwaspsare
 the three kinds of arthropod that most often bite people.
 SPIDERS. In the United States, only two kinds of
 venomous spider are truly dangerous: widow spiders
 andbrown(violin or fiddle) spiders. The black widow,
 which is found in every state but Alaska, is probably
 the most notorious widow spider. It prefers dark, dry
 places such as barns, garages, and outhouses, and also
 lives under rocks and logs. Disturbing a female black
 widow or its web may provoke a bite. Brown spiders
 also prefer sheltered places, including clothing, and
 may bite if disturbed.
 BEES AND WASPS. Bees and wasps will sting
 to defend their nests or if they are disturbed. Species  commontothe United States include honeybees, bum
blebees, yellow jackets, bald-faced hornets, brown hor
nets, and paper wasps. Of note are alsoAfricanized bee
 species, also called ‘‘killer bees’’ that have been found in
 the United States since 1990. More than 50 Americans
 die each year after being stung by a bee, wasp, or ant.
 Almost all of those deaths are the result of allergic
 reactions, and not of exposure to the venom itself.
 Snakes
 There are 20 species of venomous snakes in the
 United States. These snakes are found in every state
 except Maine, Alaska, and Hawaii. Each year about
 8,000 Americansreceive avenomoussnakebite,butno
 more than about15die, mostly from rattlesnake bites.
 The venomous snakes of the United States are
 divided into two families, the Crotalidae (pit vipers)
 and the Elapidae. Pit vipers, named after the small
 heat-sensing pit that lies between each eye and nostril,
 are responsible for about 99% of the venomous snake
bites suffered by Americans. Rattlesnakes, copperheads,
 and cottonmouths (also called water moccasins) are pit
 vipers. This family of snakes delivers its venom through
 two long, hinged fangs in the upper jaw. Some pit vipers
 carry a potent venom that can threaten the brain and
 spinal cord. The venom of others, such as the copper
heads, is less harmful.
 The Elapidae family includes two kinds of veno
mous coral snakes indigenous to the southern and
 western states. Because coral snakes are bashful crea
tures that come out only at night, they almost never
 bite humans, andareresponsible for approximately 25
 bites a year in the United States. Coral snakes also
 have short fangs and a small mouth, which lowers the
 risk of a bite actually forcing venom into a person’s
 body. However, their venom is quite poisonous.
 Marine animals
 Several varieties of marine animal may bite or sting.
 Jellyfish and stingrays are two kinds that pose a threat
 to people who live or vacation in coastal communities.
 Causes and symptoms
 Mammals
 DOGS. A typical dog bite results in a laceration,
 tear, puncture, or crush injury. Bites from large,
 powerful dogs may even cause fractures and danger
ous internal injuries. Also, dogs trained to attack may
 bite repeatedly during a single episode. Infected bites
 usually cause pain, cellulitis (inflammation of the con
nective tissues), and a pus-filled discharge at the
 wound site within 8-24 hours. Most infections are
 confined to the wound site, but many of the micro
organisms in the mouths of dogs can cause systemic
 and possibly life-threatening infections. Examples are
 bacteremia and meningitis, especially severe in people
 diagnosed with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
 (AIDS) or other health condition that increases their
 susceptibility to infection. Rabies is rare among pet
 dogs in the United States, most of which have been
 vaccinated against the disease. Tetanus is also rare but can be transmitted by a dog bite if the victim is not
 immunized.
 CATS.The mouths of cats and dogs contain many
 of the same microorganisms.Cats cratches and bites are
 also capable of transmitting the Bartonella henselae
 bacterium, which can lead to cat-scratch disease, an
 unpleasant but usually not life-threatening illness.
 Cat bites are mostly found on the arms and hands.
 Sharp cat teeth typically leave behind a deep puncture
 wound that can reach muscles, tendons, and bones,
 which are vulnerable to infection because of their
 comparatively poor blood supply. This is why cat
 bites are much more likely to become infected than
 dog bites. Also,people are less inclined to view cat
 bites as dangerous and requiring immediate attention;
 the risk that infection has set in by the time a medical
 professional is consulted is thus greater.
 HUMANS.Humans bites result from fights, sexual
 activity, medical and dental treatment,and seizures.
 Bites also raise the possibility of spousal or child abuse. 
 Children often bite other children, but those bites are
 hardly ever severe. Human bites are capable of trans
mitting a wide range of dangerous diseases, including
 hepatitis B, syphilis,andtuberculosis.
 Human bites fall into two categories: occlusional
 (true) bites and clenched-fist injuries. The former pre
sent alowerriskofinfection. Thelatter, whicharevery
 infectious and can permanently damage the hand,
 usually result from a fist hitting teeth during a fight.
 People often wait before seeking treatment for a
 clenched-fist injury, with the result that about half of
 such injuries are infected by the time they are seen by a
 medical professional.
 SPIDERS. As a rule, people rarely see a black
 widow bite, nor do they feel the bite as it occurs. The
 first (and possibly only) evidence that a person has
 been bitten may be a mild swelling of the injured area
 and two red puncture marks. Within a short time,
 however, some victims begin to experience severe mus
cle cramps and rigidity of the abdominal muscles.
 Other possible symptoms include excessive sweating,
 nausea, vomiting, headaches, and vertigo as well as
 breathing, vision, and speech problems.
 A brown spider’s bite can lead to necrotic ara
chnidism, in whichthetissue inanarea ofuptoseveral
 inches around the bite becomes necrotic (dies), produ
cing an open sore that can take months or years to
 disappear. In most cases, however, the bite simply
 produces a hard, painful, itchy, and discolored area
 that heals without treatment in 2-3 days. The bite may
 also be accompanied by a fever, chills, edema (an
 accumulation of excess tissue fluid), nausea and vomit
ing, dizziness, muscle and joint pain, and a rash.
 BEES AND WASPS. The familiar symptoms of bee
 and wasp stings include pain, redness, swelling, and
 itchiness in the area of the sting. Multiple stings can
 have muchmoresevere consequences, such as anaphy
laxis, a life-threatening allergic reaction that occurs in
 hypersensitive persons.
 Snakes
 Venomous pit viper bites usually begin to swell
 within 10 minutes and sometimes are painful. Other
 symptoms include skin blisters and discoloration,
 weakness, sweating, nausea, faintness, dizziness,
 bruising, and tender lymph nodes. Severe poisoning
 can also lead to tingling in the scalp, fingers, and
 toes, muscle contractions, an elevated heart rate,
 rapid breathing, large drops in body temperature and
 blood pressure, vomiting of blood, and coma.
 Many pit viper and coral snake bites (20-60%) fail
 to poison (envenomate) their victim, or introduce only a
 small amount of venom into the victim’s body. The
 wounds, however, can still become infected by the harm
ful microorganisms that snakes carry in their mouths.
 Coral snake bites are painful but may be hard to
 see. One to seven hours after the bite, a bitten person
 begins to experience the effects of the venom, which
 include tingling at the wound site, weakness, nausea,
 vomiting, excessive salivation, and irrational beha
vior. Major nerves of the body can become paralyzed
 for 6-14 days, causing double vision, difficulty swal
lowing and speaking, respiratory failure, and other  problems. Six to eight weeks may be needed before
 normal muscular strength is regained.
 Marine animals
 JELLYFISH. Jellyfish venom is delivered by barbs
 called nematocysts, which are located on the crea
ture’s tentacles and penetrate the skin of people who
 brush up against them. Instantly painful and itchy
 red lesions usually result. The pain can continue up
 to 48 hours. Severe cases may lead to skin necrosis,
 muscle spasms and cramps, vomiting, nausea, diar
rhea, headaches, excessive sweating, and other symp
toms. In rare instances, cardiorespiratory failure may
 also occur.
 STINGRAYS. Tail spines are the delivery mechan
ism for stingray venom. Deep puncture wounds result
 that can cause an infection if pieces of spine become
 embedded in the wound. A typical stingray injury
 scenario involves a person who inadvertently steps
 on a resting stingray and is lashed in the ankle by its
 tail. Stingray venomproducesimmediate,excruciating
 pain that lasts several hours. Sometimes the victim
 suffers a severe reaction, including vomiting, diarrhea,
 hemorrhage (bleeding), a drop in blood pressure, and
 cardiac arrhythmia (disordered heart beat).
 Diagnosis
 Mammals
 DOGS. Gathering information on the circum
stances of a dog attack is a crucial part of treatment.
 Medical professionals need to know when the attack
 occurred (the chances of infection increase dramati
cally if the wound has been left untreated for more
 than eight hours) and what led to the attack (unpro
voked attacks are more likely to be associated with
 rabies). A person’s general health must also be
 assessed, including the tetanus immunization history
 if any, as well as information concerning possible
 allergies to medication and pre-existing health pro
blems that may increase the risk of infection.
 Aphysical examination requires careful scrutiny of
 the wound, with special attention to possible bone,
 joint, ligament, muscle, tendon, nerve, or blood-vessel
 damage caused by deep punctures or severe crush inju
ries. Serious hand injuries should be evaluated by a
 specialized surgeon. Most of the time, laboratory tests
 for identifying the microorganisms in bite wounds are
 performed if infection is present. X rays and other
 diagnostic procedures may also be necessary.
 CATS. The diagnostic procedures used for dog
 bites also apply to cat bites.
 HUMANS. Testing the blood of a person who has
 been bitten for immunity to hepatitis B and other
 diseases is always necessary after a human bite.
 Ideally, the biter should be tested as well for the pre
sence of transmissible disease. Clenched-fist injuries
 often require evaluation by a hand surgeon or orthope
dist. Because many people will deny having been in a
 fight, medical professionals usually consider lacerations
 over the fourth and fifth knuckles—the typical result of
 a clenched-fist injury—to be evidence of a bite wound.
 Medical professionals also look for indications of
 spousal or child abuse when evaluating human bites.
 Arthropods
 SPIDERS. Because bites from widow spiders and
 brown spiders require different treatments, capturing
 and identifying the spider helps to establish diagnosis.
 Snakes
 Diagnosis relies on a physical examination of the
 victim, information about the circumstances of the
 bite, and a look at the snake itself (if it can safely be
 killed and brought in for identification). Blood tests
 and urinalysis supply important data on the victim’s
 condition. Chest x-rays and electrocardiography (a
 procedure for measuring heart activity) may also be
 necessary.
 Treatment
 Mammals
 DOGS. Minordogbitescanbetreatedathome.The
 American Academy of Family Physicians recommends
 gently washing the wound with soapandwaterandthen
 applying pressure to the injured area with a clean towel
 to stop the bleeding. The next step is to apply anti
biotic ointment and a sterile bandage to the wound.
 To reduce swelling and fend off infection, ice should
 be applied and the injured area kept elevated above
 the level of the heart. The wound should be cleaned
 and covered with ointment twice a day until it heals.
 Any dog bite that does not stop bleeding after
 15 minutes of pressure must be seen by a medical
 professional. The same is true for bites that are deep
 or gaping; for bites to the head, hands, or feet; and for
 bites that may have broken a bone, damaged nerves,
 or caused a major injury of another kind. Bite victims
 must also watch for infection. A fever is one sign of
 infection, as are redness, swelling, warmth, increased
 tenderness, and pus at the wound site. Diabetics, peo
ple with AIDS or cancer,individuals who have not had
 a tetanus shot in five years, and anyone else who has a medical problem that can increase susceptibility to
 infection should seek medical treatment no matter
 how minor the bite appears.
 Medical treatment of dog bites involves washing
 the wound with ananti-infective solution. Removal of
 dead and damaged tissue (under local, regional, or
 general anesthetic) may be required after the wound
 has been washed, and any person whose tetanus shots
 are not up to date should receive a booster injection.
 Some wounds are left open and allowed to heal on
 their own, while others require stitches (stitching may
 be delayed a few days if infection is a concern). Many
 emergency departments prescribe antibiotics for all
 people with dog bites, but some researchers suggest
 that antibiotics are usually unnecessary and should
 be limited to those whose injuries or other health
 problems make them likely candidates for infection.
 A follow-up visit after one or two days is generally
 required for anyone who has received bite treatment.
 CATS. Because of the high risk of infection, people
 whoarebitten byacatshouldalwaysseeadoctor.Cat
 scratches do not require professional medical treat
ment unless the wound appears infected or the
 scratched person has a weakened immune system.
 Medical treatment for cat bites generally follows
 the procedures used for dog bites. Experts advise,
 however, that cat-bite wounds should always be left
 open to prevent infection. Persons who have been
 bitten by cats generally receive antibiotics as a preven
tive measure.
 HUMANS. Human bites should always be exam
ined by a doctor. Such bites are usually treated with
 antibiotics and left open because of the high risk of
 infection. A study released in June 2004 showed that
 routine use of antibiotics for human bites may not be
 necessary, as physicians try to minimize overuse of
 antibiotics. Superficial wounds in low-risk areas may
 no longer need antibiotic treatment, but more serious
 human bites to high-risk areas such as the hands
 should be treated with antibiotics to prevent serious
 infection. A person who has been bitten may also
 require immunization against hepatitis B and other
 diseases. Persons who are being treated for a
 clenched-fist injury will require a daily follow-up
 examination for 3-5 days.
 Arthropods
 SPIDERS. No spider bite should be ignored.
 The antidote for severe widow spider bites is a sub
stance called antivenin, which contains antibodies
 taken from the blood serum of horses injected with
 spider venom. Doctors exercise caution in using
 antivenin, however, because it can trigger anaphylac
tic shock, a potentially deadly (though treatable) aller
gic reaction, and serum sickness, an inflammatory
 response that can give rise to joint pain, a fever, rashes,
 and other unpleasant, though rarely serious,
 consequences.
 An antivenin for brown spider bites exists as well,
 but it is not yet available in the United States. The drug
 dapsone, used to treat leprosy, can sometimes stop the
 tissue death associated with a brown spider bite.
 Necrotic areas may need debridement (removal of
 deadanddamagedtissue)andskingrafts. Pain medica
tions, antihistamines, antibiotics, and tetanus shots are
 a few of the other treatments that are sometimes neces
sary after a bite from a brown spider or widow spider.
 BEES AND WASPS. Most stings can be treated at
 home.Astinger that is stuck in the skin can be scraped
 off with a blade, fingernail, credit card, or piece of
 paper (using tweezers may push more venom out of
 the venom sac and into the wound). The area should
 be cleaned and covered with an ice pack. Aspirin and
 other pain medications, oral antihistamines, and cala
mine lotion are good for treating minor symptoms.
 Putting meat tenderizer on the wound has no effect.
 Persons who have been stung and experience an
 allergic reaction, or who are at risk due to their medical
 history,requireimmediatemedicalattention.Thedanger
 signs, which usually begin 10 minutes after an individual
 is stung (though possibly not for several hours), include
 nausea, faintness, chest pain, abdominal cramps,
 diarrhea, and difficulty swallowing or breathing.
 Snakes
 Although most snakes are not venomous, any sna
kebite should immediately be examined at a hospital.
 While waiting for emergency help to arrive, the victim
 should wash the wound site with soap and water, and
 then keep the injured area still and at a level lower than
 the heart. Ice should never be used on the wound site
 nor should attempts be made to suck out the venom.
 Making a cut at the wound site is also dangerous. It is
 important to stay calm and wait for emergency medical
 aid if it can arrive quickly. Otherwise, the victim should
 proceed directly to a hospital.
 When the victim arrives at a hospital, the medical
 staff must determine whether the bite was inflicted by
 a venomous snake and, if so, whether envenomation
 occurred and how much venom the person has
 received. Patients may develop low blood pressure,
 abnormal blood clotting, or severe pain, all of which
 require aggressive treatment. Fortunately, the effects
 of some snakebites can be counteracted with  antivenin. Minor rattlesnake envenomations can be
 successfully treated without antivenin, as can copper
head and water-moccasin bites. However, coral snake
 envenomations and the more dangerous rattlesnake
 envenomations require antivenin, sometimes in large
 amounts. Other treatment measures include antibiotics
 to prevent infection and a tetanus booster injection.
 Marine animals
 JELLYFISH. Vinegar and other acidic substances
 are used to neutralize jellyfish nematocysts still cling
ing to the skin, which are then scraped off. Anesthetic
 ointments, antihistamine creams, and steroid lotions
 applied to the skin are sometimes beneficial. Other
 measures maybenecessarytocounterthemanyharm
ful effects of jellyfish stings, which, if severe, require
 emergency medical care.
 STINGRAYS. Stingray wounds should be washed
 with saltwater and then soaked in very hot water for
 30-90 minutes to neutralize the venom. Afterwards,
 the wound should be examined by a doctor to ensure
 that no pieces of spine remain.
 Alternative treatment
 Arthropods
 Several alternative self-care approaches are used
 to treat minor bee, wasp, and other arthropod stings,
 including aromatherapy, ayurvedic medicine, flower
 remedies, herbs, homeopathy,andnutritional therapy.
 Prognosis
 Mammals
 Prompt treatment and recognizing that even
 apparently minor bites can have serious consequences
 are the keys to a good outcome after a mammal bite.
 Infected bites can be fatal if neglected. Surgery and
 hospitalization may be needed for severe bites.
 Arthropods
 SPIDERS. Even without treatment, adults usually
 recover from black widow bites after 2-3 days. Those
 most at risk of dying are very young children, the
 elderly, and people with high blood pressure. In the
 case of brown spider bites, the risk of death is greatest
 for children, though rare.
 BEESANDWASPS. Thepainandothersymptomsof
 a bee or wasp sting normally fade away after a few
 hours. People who are allergic to such stings, however,
 can experience severe and occasionally fatal
 anaphylaxis.
 Snakes
 Asnakebite victim’s chances of survival are excel
lent if medical aid is obtained in time. Some bites,
 however, result in amputation, permanent deformity,
 or loss of function in the injured area.
 Marine animals
 STINGRAYS. Stingray venom kills its human vic
tims on rare occasions.
 Prevention
 Mammals
 DOGS. Theriskofadogbiteinjurycanbereduced
 by avoiding sick or stray dogs, staying away from
 dogfights (people often get bitten when they try to
 separate the animals), and not behaving in ways that
 might provoke or upset dogs, such as wrestling with
 themorbotheringthemwhiletheyaresleeping,eating,
 or looking after their puppies. Special precautions
 need to be taken around infants and young children,
 who must never be left alone with a dog. Pit bulls,
 rottweilers, and German shepherds (responsible for
 nearly half of all fatal dog attacks in the United
 States in 1997-2000) are potentially dangerous pets in
 households where children live or visit. For all breeds
 of dog, obedience training as well as spaying or neu
tering lessen the chances of aggressive behavior.
 CATS. Prevention involves warning children to
 stay away from strange cats and to avoid rough play
 andother behavior that can anger cats and cause them
 to bite.
 Arthropods
 SPIDERS. Common-sense precautions include
 clearing webs out of garages, outhouses, and other
 places favored by venomous spiders; keeping one’s
 hands awayfromplaces where spiders maybelurking;
 and, when camping or vacationing, checking clothing,
 shoes, and sleeping areas.
 BEES AND WASPS. When possible, it is advised to
 avoid the nests of bees and wasps and to not eat sweet
 food or wear bright clothing, perfumes, or cosmetics
 that attract bees and wasps.
 Emergency medical kits containing self-adminis
trable epinephrine to counter anaphylactic shock are
 available for allergic people and should be carried by them at all times. People who suspect they are allergic
 should consult an allergist about shots that can reduce
 reactions to bee and wasp venom.
 Snakes
 Snakes should not be kept as pets. Measures such
 as mowing the lawn, keeping hedges trimmed, and
 removing brush from the yard also discourages snakes
 from living close to human dwellings. Tongs should be
 used to move brush, lumber, and firewood, to avoid
 exposing one’s hands to snakes that might be lying
 underneath. Similarly, golfers should never use their
 hands to retrieve golf balls from a water hole, since
 snakes can be hiding in the rocks and weeds. Caution
 is also necessary whenwalkingthroughweedyorgrassy
 areas, and childrenshouldbepreventedfromplayingin
 weedy, vacant lots and other places where snakes may
 live. Leather boots and long pants offer hikers and
 campers some protection from bites. Approaching a
 snake, even a dead one, can be dangerous, for the
 venom of recently killed snakes may still be active.
 Marine animals
 JELLYFISH. Prevention of jellyfish stings includes
 obeying posted warning signs at the beach. Also, jelly
fish tentacles may be transparent and up to 120 ft
 (36.5 m) long, therefore great caution must be exer
cised whenever a jellyfish is sighted nearby. An over
the-counter cream was being tested at the Stanford
 University School of Medicine in the summer of
 2004. In early tests, it was effective in helping to pre
vent some jellyfish contact.
 STINGRAYS. Shuffling while walking through shal
low areas that may be inhabited by stingrays will dis
turb the water, causing the animal to move before it
 can be stepped on. 