Definition
 Bladder cancer is a disease in which the cells lining
 the urinary bladder lose the ability to regulate their
 growth and start dividing uncontrollably. This abnor
malgrowthresults inamassofcellsthatformatumor.
 Description
 Bladder cancer is the sixth most common cancer
 in the United States. The American Cancer Society
 (ACS) estimated that in 2001, approximately 54,300  new cases of bladder cancer would be diagnosed
 (about 39,200 men and 15,100 women), causing
 approximately 12,400 deaths. The rates for men of
 African descent and Hispanic men are similar and
 are approximately one-half of the rate among white
 non-Hispanic men. The lowest rate of bladder cancer
 occurs in the Asian population. Among women, the
 highest rates also occur in white non-Hispanic females
 and are approximately twice the rate for Hispanics.
 Women of African descent have higher rates of blad
der cancer than Hispanic women.
 The urinary bladder is a hollow muscular organ
 that stores urine fromthekidneysuntilitisexcretedout
 ofthebody.Twotubescalledtheuretersbringtheurine
 from the kidneys to the bladder. The urethra carries
 the urine from the bladder to the outside of the body.
 Bladder cancer has a very high rate of recurrence.
 Even after superficial tumors are completely removed,
 there is a 75% chance that new tumors will develop
 in other areas of the bladder. Hence, patients need
 frequent and thorough follow-up care.
 Causes and symptoms
 Although the exact cause of bladder cancer is not
 known, smokers are twice as likely as nonsmokers to get
 the disease. Hence, smoking is considered the greatest
 risk factor for bladder cancer. Workers who are exposed
 to certain chemicals used in the dye industry and in the
 rubber, leather, textile, and paint industries are believed
 to be at a higher risk for bladder cancer. The disease also
 is three times more common in men than in women;
 caucasians also are at an increased risk. The risk of
 bladder cancer increases with age. Most cases are
 foundinpeoplewhoare50–70yearsold.In2003,studies
 showed that hormone replacement therapy (HRT), a
 treatment used by many postmenopausal women, sig
nificantly increased the risk of bladder andothercancers.
 Frequent urinary infections, kidney and bladder
 stones, and other conditions that cause long-term
 irritation to the bladder may increase the risk of getting
 bladder cancer. A past history of tumors in the bladder
 also could increase one’s risk of getting other tumors.
 Oneofthefirstwarningsignals ofbladder canceris
 bloodinthe urine. Sometimes, there is enough blood to
 change the color of the urine to a yellow-red or a dark
 red. At other times, the color of the urine appears
 normal but chemical testing of the urine reveals the
 presence of blood cells. A change in bladder habits
 such as painful urination, increased frequency of
 urination and a feeling of needing to urinate but not
 being able to do so are some of the signs of possible  bladder cancer. All of these symptoms also may be
 caused by conditions other than cancer, but it is impor
tant to see a doctor and have the symptoms evaluated.
 Whendetectedearlyandtreatedappropriately,patients
 have a very good chance of being cured completely.
 Diagnosis
 If a doctor has any reason to suspect bladder can
cer, several tests can help find out if the disease is
 present. As a first step, a complete medical history
 will be taken to check for any risk factors. A thorough
 physical examination will be conducted to assess all the
 signs and symptoms. Laboratory testing of a urine
 sample will help to rule out the presence of a bacterial
 infection. In a urine cytology test, the urine is examined
 under a microscope to look for any abnormal or can
cerous cells. A catheter (tube) can be advanced into
 the bladder through the urethra, and a salt solution is
 passed through it to wash the bladder. The solution
 can thenbe collected and examined under a microscope
 to check for the presence of cancerous cells.
 Atest known as the intravenous pyelogram (IVP)
 is an x–ray examination that is done after a dye is
 injected into the blood stream through a vein in the
 arm. The dye travels through the blood stream and
 then reaches the kidneys to be excreted. It clearly out
lines the kidneys, ureters, bladder, and urethra.
 Multiple x rays are taken to detect any abnormality
 in the lining of these organs.
 564
 The physician may use a procedure known as a
 cystoscopy to view the inside of the bladder. A thin
 hollow lighted tube is introduced into the bladder
 through the urethra. If any suspicious looking masses
 are seen, a small piece of the tissue can be removed
 fromitusingapairofbiopsyforceps.Thetissueisthen
 examinedmicroscopically to verify if cancer is present,
 and if so, to identify the type of cancer.
 If cancer is detected and there is evidence to indi
cate that it has metastasized (spread) to distant sites in
 the body, imaging tests such as chest x rays, computed
 tomography scans (CT), and magnetic resonance ima
ging (MRI) may be done to determine which organs
 are affected. Bladder cancer generally tends to spread
 to the lungs, liver, and bone.
 Treatment
 Treatment for bladder cancer depends on the
 stage of the tumor. The patient’s medical history,
 overall health status, and personal preferences also
 are taken into account when deciding on an appropri
ate treatment plan. The three standard modes of treat
ment available for bladder cancer are surgery,
 radiation therapy, and chemotherapy. In addition,
 newer treatment methods such as photodynamic ther
apy andimmunotherapy also are being investigated in
 clinical trials.
 Surgery is considered an option only when the dis
ease is in its early stages. If the tumor is localized to a small area and has not spread to the inner layers of the
 bladder,then the surgery is done without cutting open
 the abdomen. Acytoscope is introduced into the blad
der through the urethra, and the tumor is removed
 through it. This procedure is calleda transurethral
 resection (TUR). Passing a high-energy laser beam
 through the cytoscope and burning the cancer may
 treat any remaining cancer.This procedure is known
 as electrofulguration. If the cancer has invaded the walls
 of the bladder, surgery will be done through an incision
 in the abdomen. Cancer that is not very large can be
 removed by partial cystectomy, a procedure where a
 part of the bladder is removed. If the cancer is large or
 is present in more than one area of the bladder, a radical
 cystectomy is done. In this operation, the entire bladder
 and adjoining organs also maybe removed. In men, the
 prostate is removed, while in women, the uterus, ovar
ies,and fallopian tubes are removed.
 If the entire urinary bladder is removed, an alter
nate place must be created for th eurine to be stored
 before it is excreted out of the body. To do this, a piece
 of intestine is converted into a small bag and attached
 to th eureters.This is then connected to an opening
 (stoma)that is made in the abdominal wall.The pro
cedure is called aurostomy. In some urostomy proce
dures,the urine from the intestinal sac is routed into a
 bag that is placed over the stoma in the abdominal
 wall.The bag is hidden by the clothing and has to be
 emptied occasionally by the patient. In a different
 procedure, the urine is collected in the intestinal sac,
 but there is no bag on the outside of the abdomen.The
 intestinal sac has to be emptied by the patient, by
 placing a drainage tube through thes toma.
 Radiation therapy that uses high-energy rays to
 kill cancer cells is generally used after surgery to destroy any remaining cancer cells that may not have
 been removed during surgery. If the tumor is in a
 location that makes surgery difficult, or if it is large,
 radiation may be used before surgery to shrink the
 tumor. In cases of advanced bladder cancer, radiation
 therapy is used to ease the symptoms such as pain,
 bleeding, or blockage. Radiation can be delivered by
 external beam, where a source of radiation that is
 outside the body focuses the radiation on the area of
 the tumor. Occasionally, a small pellet of radioactive
 material may be placed directly into the cancer. This is
 known as interstitial radiation therapy.
 Chemotherapy uses anticancer drugs to destroy
 the cancer cells that may have migrated to distant
 sites. The drugs are introduced into the bloodstream
 by injecting them into a vein in the arm or taking
 them orally in pill form. Generally a combination of
 drugs is more effective than any single drug in treating
 bladder cancer. Chemotherapy may be given follow
ing surgery to kill any remaining cancer cells. It also
 may be given even when no remaining cancer cells
 can be seen. This is called adjuvant chemotherapy.
 Anticancer drugs, including thiotepa, doxorubicin,
 and mitomycin, also may be instilled directly into
 the bladder (intravesicular chemotherapy) to treat
 superficial tumors. In 2003, the FDA was giving fast
 track designation to a form of paclitaxel, a common
 anticancer drug, that was shown effective in treating
 metastatic or locally advanced bladder cancer.
 A2003report stated that giving patients with blad
der cancer chemotherapy followed by surgery may
 improve their outcomes. In the study of 307 patients,
 those with this combination of therapy lived two
 years longer than those treated with surgery only.
 Immunotherapy, or biological therapy, uses the
 body’s own immune cells to fight the disease. To treat
 superficial bladder cancer, bacille Calmette-Guerin
 (BCG) may be instilled directly into the bladder. BCG
 is a weakened (attenuated) strain of the tuberculosis
 bacillus that stimulates the body’s immune system to
 fight the cancer. This therapy has been shown to be
 effective in controlling superficial bladder cancer.
 Photodynamic treatment is a novel mode of treat
ment that uses special chemicals and light to kill the
 cancerous cells. First, a drug is introduced into the
 bladder that makes the cancer cells more susceptible
 to light. Following that, a special light is shone on the
 bladder in an attempt to destroy the cancerous cells.
 New treatments are continuously being investi
gated. Scientists have made great strides in gene map
ping and research in the twenty-first century. In 2003,
 a type of gene therapy was being tested on patients
 with bladder cancer with success, but further enhance
ments were needed.
 Prognosis
 When detected in early stages, the prognosis for
 those with bladder cancer is excellent. At least 94% of
 people survive five years or more after initial diagno
sis. However, if the disease has spread to the nearby
 tissues, the survival rate drops to 49%. If it has metas
tasized to distant organs such as the lung and liver,
 commonly only 6% of patients will survive five years
 or more. As newer treatment methods are developed,
 some prognoses improve. For example, neoadjuvant
 chemotherapy, or giving certain chemotherapy drugs
 following surgery, may help people live up to
 31 months longer than previous treatments allowed.
 Prevention
 Since the exact causes of bladder cancer are not
 known, there is no certain way to prevent it. Avoiding
 risk factors whenever possible is the best alternative.
 Since smoking doubles one’s risk of getting blad
der cancer, avoiding tobacco may prevent at least half
 the deaths that result from bladder cancer. Taking
 appropriate safety precautions when working with
 organic cancer-causing chemicals is another way of
 preventing the disease. Women should discuss the
 risks vs. benefits of hormone replacement therapy
 with their physicians.
 If a person has had a history of bladder cancer, or
 has been exposed to cancer-causing chemicals, he or
 she is considered to be at an increased risk of getting
 bladder cancer. Similarly, kidney stones, frequent urin
ary infections, and other conditions that cause long
term irritation to the bladder also increase the chance
 of getting the disease. In such cases, it is advisable to
 undergo regular screening tests such as urine cytology,
 cystoscopy and x rays of the urinary tract, so that
 bladder cancer can be detected at its early stages and
 treated appropriately. 