 Definition
 Bladder training is a behavioral modification treat
ment technique for urinary incontinence that involves
 placing a patient on a toileting schedule. The time
 interval between urination is gradually increased in
 order to train the patient to remain continent.
 Purpose
 Bladder training is used to treat urinary urge
 incontinence. Urge incontinence occurs when an
 individual feels a sudden need to urinate and cannot
 control the urge to do so and, as a consequence, invo
luntarily loses urine before making it to the toilet.
 Precautions
 Incontinence may be controlled through a num
ber of invasive and non-invasive treatment options,
 including Kegel exercises, biofeedback, bladder
 training, medication, insertable incontinence devices,
 and surgery. Each patient should undergo a full
 diagnostic work-up to determine the type and cause
 of the incontinence in order to determine the best
 course of treatment. 
  Description
 Bladder training may be prescribed and implemen
ted by a general physician, urologist, or urogynecolo
gist. A urination schedule is created for the patient.
 The schedule typically starts out with fairly short inter
vals between bathroom breaks (e.g., an hour). As soon
 as the patient is able to consistently remain continent
 for several days at a certain toileting time interval, the
 time span is increased. Bladder training continues until
 the patient regularly achieves continence at a time
 interval he/she feels comfortable with.
 Preparation
 A complete evaluation to determine the cause of
 urinary incontinence is critical to proper treatment.
 Athorough medical history and physical examination
 should be performed on patients considering bladder
 training. Diagnostic testing may include x rays, ultra
sound, urine tests, and a physical examination of
 the pelvis. It may include a series of exams called
 urodynamic testing that measure bladder pressure
 and capacity and the urinary flow. The patient may
 also be asked to keep a diary of their urination output
 and frequency and episodes of incontinence over a
 period of several days or a week.
 Risks
 Bladder training may not be successful in all
 patients with urge incontinence. Patients who demon
strate a strong desire to control their continence and
 are committed to sticking with a training program
 tend to have the most success with bladder training.
 Normal results
 Patients who undergo successful bladder training
 gain complete or improved control over their urina
tion. In some cases, additional alternate treatment
 such as biofeedback or pelvic muscle exercises may
 be recommended to supplement the progress made
 with bladder training. 