 Definition
 Blepharoplasty is a cosmetic surgical procedure
 that removes fat deposits, excess tissue, or muscle
 fromtheeyelidstoimprovetheappearanceoftheeyes.
 Purpose
 The primary use of blepharoplasty is for improv
ing the cosmetic appearance of the eyes. In some older
 patients, however, sagging and excess skin surround
ing the eyes can be so extensive that it limits the range
 of vision. In those cases, blepharoplasty serves a more
 functional purpose.
 Precautions
 Beforeperformingblepharoplasty,thesurgeonwill
 assess whether the patient is a good candidate for the treatment. A good medical history is important. The
 surgeon will want toknowaboutanyhistoryofthyroid
 disease, hypertension, or eye problems, which may
 increase the risk of complications.
 Description
 Blepharoplasty can be performed on the upper or
 lower eyelid; it can involve the removal of excess skin
 and fat deposits and the tightening of selected muscles
 surrounding the eyelids. The goal is to provide a more
 youthful appearance.
 Thesurgeon will begin by deciding whether excess
 skin, fat deposits, or muscle looseness are at fault.
 While the patient is sitting upright, the surgeon will
 mark on the skin where incisions will be made. Care
 will be taken to hide the incision lines in the natural
 skin folds above and below the eye. The patient then
 receives injections of a local anesthetic to numb the
 pain. Many surgeons also give the patient a sedative
 intravenously during the procedure.
 After a small, crescent-shaped section of eyelid
 skin is removed, the surgeon will work to tease out
 small pockets of fat that have collected in the lids. If
 muscle looseness is also a problem, the surgeon may
 trim tissue or add a stitch to pull it tighter. Then the
 incision is closed with stitches.
 In some patients, fat deposits in the lower eyelid
 may be the only or primary problem. Such patients
 may be good candidates for transconjunctival ble
pharoplasty. In this procedure the surgeon makes no
 incision on the surface of the eyelid, but instead enters  from behind to tease out the fat deposits from a small
 incision. The advantage of this procedure is that there
 is no visible scar.
 Preparation
 Prior tosurgery, patientsmeetwiththeir sur
geon to discuss the procedure, clarify the results
 that can be achieved, and discuss the potential pro
blems that might occur. Having realistic expecta
tions is important in any cosmetic procedure.
 Patients will learn, for example, that although ble
pharoplasty can improve the appearance of the eye
lid, other procedures, such as a chemical peel, will be  necessary to reduce the appearance of wrinkles
 around the eye. Some surgeons prescribe vitamin C
 and vitamin K for 10 days prior to surgery in the
 belief that this helps the healing process. Patients are
 also told to stop smoking in the weeks before and
 after the procedure, and to refrain from alcohol and
 aspirin.
 Aftercare
 An antibiotic ointment is applied to the line of
 stitches for several days after surgery. Patients also
 take an antibiotic several times a day to prevent
 infection. Ice-cold compresses are applied to the
 eyes continuously for the first day following sur
gery, and several times a day for the next week or
 so, to reduce swelling. Some swelling and discolora
tion around the eyes is expected with the procedure.
 Patients should avoid aspirin or alcoholic beverages
 for one week and should limit their activities,
 including bending, straining, and lifting. The
 stitches are removed a few days after surgery.
 Patients can generally return to their usual activities
 within a week to 10 days.
 Risks
 As with any surgical procedure, blepharo
plasty can lead to infection and scarring. Good
 care of the wound following surgery can minimize
 these risks. In cases where too much skin is
 removed from the eyelids, the patient may have
 difficulty closing his eyes. Dry eye syndrome may
 develop, requiring the use of artificial tears to
 lubricate the eye. In a rare complication, called
 retrobulbar hematoma, a pocket of blood forms
 behind the eyeball.
 Normal results
 Most patients can expect good results from ble
pharoplasty, with the removal of excess eyelid skin
 and fat producing a more youthful appearance.
 Some swelling and discoloration is expected immedi
ately following the procedure, but this clears in time.
 Small scars will be left where the surgeon has made
 incisions; but these generally lighten in appearance
 over several months, and, if placed correctly, will not
 be readily noticeable.
 Abnormal results
 As noted, if too much excess skin is removed
 from the upper eyelid, the patient may be unable to
 close his eyes completely; another surgery to correct
 the defect may be required. Similarly, too much skin
 can be removed from the lower eyelid, allowing too
 much of the white of the eye (the sclera) to show. In
 extreme cases, the lower lid may be pulled down too
 far, revealing the underlying tissue. Called an ectro
pion, this, too, may require a second, corrective
 surgery. The eye’s ability to make tears may also be
 compromised, leading to dry eye syndrome. Dry eye
 syndrome is potentially dangerous; in rare cases
 it leads to damage to the cornea of the eye and
 vision loss. 