 Definition
 Blood-viscosity reducing drugs are medicines that
 improve blood flow by making the blood less viscous
 (sticky).
 Purpose
 The main use of blood-viscosity reducing drugs
 is to relieve painful leg cramps caused by poor cir
culation, a condition called intermittent claudication.
 Physicians also may prescribe this medicine for other
 conditions, including stroke, impotence, male inferti
lity, Raynaud’s disease, and nerve and circulation
 problems caused by diabetes.
 Description
 Blood-viscosity reducing drugs are available only
 with a physician’s prescription and come in extended
release tablet form.Examplesofblood-viscosityreducing
 drugs are pentoxifylline (Trental) and oxypentifylline. 
  Recommended dosage
 Theusualdosageforadultsis400mg,twotothree
 times a day, with meals. However, the dose may be
 different for different patients. Check with the physi
cian who prescribed the drug or the pharmacist who
 filled the prescription for the correct dosage. Dosages
 for children must be determined by a physician.
 Taking an antacid with this medicine may help
 prevent upset stomach.
 Precautions
 This medicine may relieve leg pain that results
 from poor circulation, but it should not be considered
 a substitute for other treatments the physician recom
mends, such as physical therapy or surgery.
 This medicine may take several weeks to produce
 noticeable results. Be sure to keep taking it as directed,
 even if it doesn’t seem to be helping.
 Patients being treated with this medicine should
 not smoke, as smoking may worsen the conditions for
 which the medicine is prescribed.
 Anyonewhohashadunusualreactionstopentox
ifylline, aminophylline, caffeine, dyphylline, ethylene
diamine (contained in aminophylline), oxtriphylline,
 theobromine, or theophylline in the past should let his
 or her physician know before taking a blood-viscosity
 reducing drug. The physician should also be told
 about any allergies to foods, dyes, preservatives, or
 other substances.
 Womenwhoarepregnantorbreastfeedingorwho
 may become pregnant should check with their physi
cians before using a blood-viscosity reducing drug.
 Older people may be especially sensitive to the
 effects of this medicine, which may increase the chance
 of side effects.
 Before using blood-viscosity reducing drugs, peo
ple with any of these medical problems should make
 sure their physicians are aware of their conditions:
 recent stroke
 any condition in which there is an increased chance
 of bleeding
 kidney disease
 liver disease
 Side effects
 Minor discomforts, such as dizziness, headache,
 upset stomach, nausea,orvomiting usually go away
 as the body adjusts to the drug and do not require
 medical treatment unless they persist or they interfere
 with normal activities.
 More serious side effects are rare. However, if
 these or any other unusual or troublesome symptoms
 occur, check with the physician who prescribed the
 medicine as soon as possible:
 chest pain
 irregular heartbeat
 Interactions
 Blood-viscosity reducing drugs may interact
 with a other medicines, changing the effects of one
 or both of the drugs or increasing the risk of side
 effects. Anyone who takes blood-viscosity reducing
 drugs should let the physician know all other pre
scription or nonprescription (over-the-counter)
 medicines he or she is taking. Among the drugs
 that may interact with blood-viscosity reducing
 drugs are:
 anticoagulants such as warfarin (Coumadin)(also
 called blood thinners or clot inhibitors)
 calcium channel blockers such as diltiazem
 (Cardizem), used to treat high blood pressure
 angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
 such as enalapril (Vasotec), used to treat high blood
 pressure
 theophylline (Theo-Dur)
 medicines such as cimetidine (Tagamet), taken for
 ulcers or heartburn.  