 Definition
 One of the most commonly ordered clinical
 laboratory tests, a blood count, also called a com
plete blood count (CBC), is a basic evaluation of
 the cells (red blood cells, white blood cells, and plate
lets) suspended in the liquid part of the blood
 (plasma). It involves determining the numbers, con
centrations, and conditions of the different types of
 blood cells.
 Purpose
 The CBC is a useful screening and diagnostic test
 that is often done as part of a routine physical exam
ination. It can provide valuable information about the
 blood and blood-forming tissues (especially the bone
 marrow), as well as other body systems. Abnormal
 results can indicate the presence of a variety of condi
tions—including anemias, leukemias, and infections—
 sometimes before the patient experiences symptoms of
 the disease.
 Description
 Acompletebloodcountis actually a series of tests
 in which the numbers of red blood cells, white blood
 cells, and platelets in a given volume of blood are
 counted. The CBCalsomeasuresthehemoglobincon
tent and the packed cell volume (hematocrit) of the red
 bloodcells, assesses the size and shape of the red blood
 cells, and determines the types and percentages of
 white blood cells. Components of the complete blood
 count (hemoglobin, hematocrit, white blood cells,
 platelets, etc.) can also be tested separately, and are
 sometimes done that way when a doctor wants to
 monitor a specific condition, such as the white cell
 count of a patient diagnosed with leukemia, or the
 hemoglobin of a patient who has recently received a
 blood transfusion. Because of its value, though, as an
 indicator of a person’s overall health, the CBC pack
age is most frequently ordered.
 The blood count is performed relatively inexpen
sively and quickly. Most laboratories routinely use
 some type of automated equipment to dilute the
 blood, sample a measured volume of the diluted sus
pension, and count the cells in that volume. In addi
tion to counting actual numbers of red cells, white
 cells, and platelets, the automated cell counters also
 measure the hemoglobin and calculate the hematocrit
 and the red blood cell indices (measures of the size and
 hemoglobin content of the red blood cells).  Technologists then examine a stained blood smear
 under the microscope to identify any abnormalities
 in the appearance of the red blood cells and to report
 the types and percentages of white blood cells
 observed.
 The red blood cell (RBC) count determines the
 total number ofredcells (erythrocytes) in a sample of
 blood. The red cells, the most numerous of the cellu
lar elements, carry oxygen from the lungs to the
 body’s tissues. Hemoglobin (Hgb) is the protein
iron compound in the red blood cells that enables
 them to transport oxygen. Its concentration corre
sponds closely to the RBC count. Also closely tied
 to the RBC and hemoglobin values is the hematocrit
 (Hct), which measures the percentage of red blood
 cells in the total blood volume. The hematocrit
 (expressed as percentage points) is normally about
 three times the hemoglobin concentration (reported
 as grams per deciliter).
 Red blood cell indices provide information
 about the size and hemoglobin content of the red
 cells. They are useful in differentiating types of ane
mias. The indices include four measurements that are
 calculated using the RBC count, hemoglobin, and
 hematocrit results. Mean corpuscular volume
 (MCV) is a measurement of the average size of the
 red blood cells and indicates whether that is small,
 large ornormal.The red blood cell distribution width (RDW)isanindicationofthevariationinRBCsize.
 Mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH) measures the
 average amount (weight) of hemoglobin within a red
 bloodcell. Asimilarmeasurement,meancorpuscular
 hemoglobin concentration (MCHC), expresses the
 average concentration of hemoglobin in the red
 blood cells.  Thewhitebloodcell(WBC)countdeterminesthe
 total number of white cells (leukocytes) in the blood
 sample. Fewer in number than the red cells, WBCs
 are the body’s primary means of fighting infection.
 There are five main types of white cells (neutrophils,
 lymphocytes, monocytes, eosinophils, and baso
phils), each of whichplays adifferent role in respond
ing to the presence of foreign organisms in the body.
 A differential white cell count is done by staining a
 smear of the patient’s blood with a Wright’s stain,
 allowing the different types of white cells to be clearly
 seen under the microscope. A technologist then
 counts a minimum of 100 WBCs and reports each
 type of white cell as a percentage of the total white
 blood cells counted.
 Theplatelet count is an actual countofthe number
 of platelets (thrombocytes) in a given volumeofblood.
 Platelets, the smallest of the cellular elements of blood,
 are involved in blood clotting. Because platelets
 can clump together, the automated counting method
 is subject to a certain level of error and may not
 be accurate enough for low platelet counts. For this
 reason, very low platelet levels are often counted
 manually.
 Normal results
 Blood count values can vary by age and sex. The
 normal red blood cell count ranges from 4.2–5.4 mil
lion RBCspermicroliter of blood for men and 3.6–5.0
 million for women. Hemoglobin values range
 from 14–18 grams per deciliter of blood for men and
 12–16 grams for women. The normal hematocrit is
 42–54%formenand36–48%forwomen.Thenormal
 number of white blood cells for both men and women
 is approximately 4,000–10,000 WBCspermicroliter of
 blood.
 Abnormal results
 Abnormal blood count results are seen in a vari
ety of conditions. One of the most common is ane
mias, which are characterized by low RBC counts,
 hemoglobins, and hematocrits. Infections and leuke
mias are associated with increased numbers of
 WBCs. 