Definition
 Boils and carbuncles are bacterial infections of
 hair follicles and surrounding skin that form pustules
 (small blister-like swellings containing pus) around
 the follicle. Boils are sometimes called furuncles. A
 carbuncle is formed when several furuncles merge
 to form a single deep abscess with several heads or
 drainage points 
  Description
 Boils and carbuncles are firm reddish swellings
 about0.2–0.4in(5-10mm)acrossthatareslightlyraised
 above the skin surface. They are sore to the touch. A
 boil usually hasavisible central coreofpus; acarbuncle
 is larger and has several visible heads. Boils occur most
 commonly on the face, back of the neck, buttocks,
 upper legs and groin area, armpits, and upper torso.
 Carbuncles are less common than single boils; they are
 most likely to form at the back of the neck. Males are
 more likely to develop carbuncles.
 Boils and carbuncles are common problems in the
 general population, particularly among adolescents
 and adults. People who are more likely to develop
 these skin infections include those with:
 diabetes, especially when treated by injected insulin
 alcoholism or drug abuse
 poor personal hygiene
 crowded living arrangements
 jobs or hobbies that expose them to greasy or oily
 substances, especially petroleum products
 allergies or immune system disorders, including HIV
 infection.
 family members with recurrent skin infections
 Causes and symptoms
 Boils and carbuncles are caused by Staphylococcus
 aureus, a bacterium that causes an infection in an oil
 gland or hair follicle. Although the surface of human
 skin is usually resistant to bacterial infection, S. aureus
 canenterthroughabreakinthe skin surface–including
 breaks caused by needle punctures for insulin or drug
 injections. Hair follicles that are blocked by greasy
 creams, petroleum jelly, or similar products are
 more vulnerable to infection. Bacterial skin infections
 can be spread by shared cosmetics or washcloths, close
 human contact, or by contact with pus from a boil or
 carbuncle.
 As the infection develops, an area of inflamed tis
sue gradually forms a pus-filled swelling or pimple that
 is painful to touch. As the boil matures, it forms a
 yellowish head or point. It may either continue to
 swell until the point bursts open and allows the pus to
 drain, or it may be gradually reabsorbed into the skin.
 It takes between one and two weeks for a boil to heal
 completely after it comes to a head and discharges
 pus. The bacteria that cause the boil can spread into
 other areas of the skin or even into the bloodstream
 if the skin aroundthe boil is injured by squeezing. If the  infection spreads, the patient will usually develop chills
 andfever, swollenlymphnodes(lymphadenitis),andred
 lines in the skin running outward from the boil.
 Furunculosis is a word that is sometimes used
 to refer to recurrent boils. Many patients have
 repeated episodes of furunculosis that are difficult to
 treat because their nasal passages carry colonies of
 S. aureus. These bacterial colonies make it easy for
 the patient’s skin to be reinfected. They are most likely
 to develop in patients with diabetes, HIV infection, or
 other immune system disorders.
 Carbuncles are formed when the bacteria infect
 several hair follicles that are close together.
 Carbunculosis is a word that is sometimes used to
 refer to the development of carbuncles. The abscesses
 spread until they merge with each other to form a
 single large area of infected skin with several pus-filled  heads. Patients with carbuncles may also have a low
grade fever or feel generally unwell.
 Diagnosis
 The diagnosis of boils and carbuncles is usually
 madebythepatient’s primary care doctor on the basis
 of visual examination of the skin. In some cases invol
ving recurrent boils on the face, the doctor may need
 to consider acne as a possible diagnosis, but for the
 most part boils and carbuncles are not difficult to
 distinguish from other skin disorders.
 Treatment
 Patient and family education
 Patient education is an important part of the
 treatment of boils and carbuncles. Patients need to
 be warned against picking at or squeezing boils
 because of the danger of spreading the infection into
 other parts of the skin or bloodstream. It is especially
 important to avoid squeezing boils around the mouth
 or nose because infections in these areas can be carried
 to the brain. Patients should also be advised about
 keeping the skin clean, washing their hands carefully
 before and after touching the boil or carbuncle, avoid
ing the use of greasy cosmetics or creams, and keeping
 their towels and washcloths separate from those of
 other family members. Some doctors may recommend
 an antiseptic soap or gel for washing the infected
 areas.
 If the patient has had several episodes of furuncu
losis, the doctor may examine family membersorclose
 contacts to see if they are carriers of S. aureus. In many
 cases they also need treatment for boils or carbuncles.
 Skin infections and reinfections involving small
 groups or clusters of people are being reported more
 frequently in the United States.
 Medications
 Boils are usually treated with application of antibio
tic creams–usually clindamycin or polymyxin–following
 the application of hot compresses. The compresses help
 the infection to come to a head and drain.
 Carbuncles and furunculosis are usually treated
 with oral antibiotics as well as antibiotic creams or
 ointments. The specific medications that are given
 are usually dicloxacillin (Dynapen) or cephalexin
 (Keflex). Erythromycin may be given to patients who
 are allergic to penicillin. The usual course of oral anti
biotics is 5-10 days; however, patients with recurrent
 furunculosis may be given oral antibiotics for longer periods. Furunculosis is treated with a combination of
 dicloxacillin and rifampin (Rifadin).
 Patients with bacterial colonies in their nasal pas
sages are often given mupirocin (Bactroban) to apply
 directly to the lining of the nose.
 Surgical treatment
 Boils and carbuncles that are very large, or that
 are not draining, may be opened with a sterile needle
 or surgical knife to allow the pus to drain. The doctor
 will usually give the patient a local anesthetic if a knife
 is used; surgical treatment of boils is painful and
 usually leaves noticeable scars.
 Alternative treatment
 Naturopathic therapy
 Naturopathic practitioners usually recommend
 changes in the patient’s diet as well as applying herbal
 poultices to the infected area. The addition of zinc
 supplements and vitamin A to the diet is reported to
 be effective in treating boils. The application of a paste
 or poultice containing goldenseal (Hydrastis canaden
sis) root is recommended by naturopaths on the
 grounds that goldenseal helps to kill bacteria and
 reduce inflammation.
 Homeopathy
 Homeopaths maintain that taking the proper
 homeopathic medication in the first stages of a boil
 or carbuncle will bring about early resolution of the
 infection and prevent pus formation. The most likely
 choices are Belladonna or Hepar sulphuris. If the boil has already formed, Mercurius vivus or Silica may be
 recommended to bring the pus to a head.
 Western herbal therapies
 Avarietyofherbalremediescanbeappliedtopically
 to boils to fight infection. These include essential oils
 of bergamot (Citrus bergamia), chamomile (Matricaria
 recutita), lavender (Lavandula officinalis), and sage
 (Salvia officinalis), as well as tea tree oil (Melaleuca
 spp.). Herbalists also recommend washing the skin
 with a mixture of goldenseal and witch hazel. To
 fight the inflammation associated with boils, herbalists
 suggest marsh mallow (Althaea officinalis) ointment,
 tinctures (herbal solutions made with alcohol) of blue
 flag (Iris versicolor)ormyrrh(Commiphoramolmol),and
 slippery elm (Ulmus fulva) made into a poultice.
 Prognosis
 The prognosis for most boils is excellent. Some
 patients, however, suffer from recurrent carbuncles or
 furunculosis. In addition, althoughthe spread ofinfec
tion from boils is relatively unusual, there have been
 deaths reported from brain infections caused by
 squeezing boils on the upper lip or in the tissue folds
 at the base of the nose.
 Prevention
 There are some precautions that people can take
 to minimize the risk of developing bacterial skin
 infections:
 cleanse skin properly with soap and water, and take
 showers rather than tub baths
 do not share washcloths, towels, or facial cosmetics
 with others
 cut down on greasy or fatty foods and snacks
 always wash hands before touching the face
 consider using antiseptic soaps and shower gels
 consult a doctor if furunculosis is a persistent pro
blem–it may indicate an underlying disease such as
 diabetes. 