Definition
 Bonegrowthstimulationisthetechniqueofpromot
ing bone growth in difficult to heal fractures by applying
 a low electrical current or ultrasound to the fracture.
 Purpose
 Bone growth stimulation is done when satisfac
tory healing is not occurring naturally or when the
 pace of healing is too slow. This condition is called
 fracture nonunion, and it occurs more frequently
 among adults than children, in people with severe or
 complex fractures, and in people who smoke.
 The theory behind applying an electric current to
 fractures to stimulate healing is based on the fact that
 the concave side of the bone becomes negatively
 charged and the convex side is positively charged. It
 is believed that artificially encouraging this charging
 with an electric current will speed healing. In 1996, the
 FoodandDrugAdministration (FDA) also approved the application of low intensity ultrasound pulses as a
 treatment for fracture nonunion.
 Ultrasound and electromagnetic stimulation are
 expensive and are used only when healing problems
 exist for a substantial length of time. Each method
 must be used for at least three to six months to be
 effective.
 Precautions
 Bonegrowthstimulationcannotbeusedifthegap
 between the ends of the fracture is too large.
 Description
 Electric stimulation can be applied either from the
 inside of the body (invasively) or from the outside the
 body (noninvasively). Ultrasound is a noninvasive
 procedure. The type of stimulation selected depends
 onthedoctor’s preference, the type andlocation of the
 fracture, and the patient’s motivation to comply with
 the treatment schedule. Treatment can take anywhere
 from three to six months.
 Invasive stimulators
 Invasive electric stimulators are either fully or
 partially implantable. The advantage of these devices
 is that they apply a direct electric current to the frac
ture 24 hours a day. The fully implantable stimulator
 requires little daily attention from the patient. Patients
 using a semi-implanted stimulator must regulate their
 owntreatment schedule and have to care for the exter
nal power pack. The disadvantage of implantable and
 semi-implantable stimulators is that their implanta
tion is a surgical procedure.
 Fully implantable direct current stimulators are
 installed in a hospital under general or regional
 anesthesia. Both the stimulator and the power source
 are implanted. The surgeon makes an incision and
 places a spiral shaped cathode inside the bone. A
 wire leads to the power source and a small anode.
 The power source is a battery pack that is implanted
 in the nearby muscle. The body transmits electrical current to close the circuit. The incision is then closed.
 Once in place, the device provides continuous direct
 electric current for bone growth stimulation.
 Partially implanted stimulators use cathode pins
 that are implanted at the edge of each bone that is
 fractured. Wires lead to the surface of the skin where a
 power source and the anode are located. Wires com
plete the circuit. The external portion of the device is
 held in place by a cast. This source of stimulation also
 runs continuously.
 Noninvasive stimulators
 In the noninvasive stimulator, external electro
magnetic coils are placed on either side of the fracture
 and are held in place by a strap or cuff. Locating the
 coils correctly is important, and their location relative
 to the fracture is usually confirmed by x rays.
 The coils produce a pulsating electromagnetic
 field. It is up to the patient to maintain the prescribed
 treatment schedule. Effective treatment requires sti
mulation anywhere from three to ten hours each day
 in periods of no less than one hour.
 Ultrasound stimulation is the most recent treat
ment for stimulating bone growth. A device that gen
erates low intensity pulses of sound is applied to the
 skin over the fracture. The advantage of this technique
 is that it is noninvasive andtheperiodofapplicationof
 the sound pulses can be as short as 20-30 minutes each
 day. The results of this treatment have been studied
 less than the effect of electromagnetic stimulation.
 Preparation
 Bone growth stimulation is done only when heal
ing has failed to occur for many months. Before it is
 started, x rays are done of the fracture area. If the
 device is to be implanted, standard preoperative
 blood and urine tests are done. The patient may meet
 with an anesthesiologist to discuss any conditions that
 might affect the administration of anesthesia.
 Aftercare
 If a noninvasive, pulsating, electromagnetic field
 device is used, the patient must not put any stress or
 weight on the fracture until it is healed, which is a
 matter of months in most cases. In all lower limb
 fractures, regardless of the stimulation method used,
 the patient can not bear weight on the limb with the
 fracture until healing is complete. This limits the
 patient’s mobility for many months. Patients have
 the responsibility for regularly making sure that the
 unit works and caring for external devices and the
 casts that hold them in place.
 Risks
 Noninvasive devices have few risks associated
 with them. The main risk associated with implantable
 devices is the development of infection at the site of
 implantation.
 Normal results
 Success in healing a fracture nonunion using bone
 growth stimulation depends on the type, location, and
 severity of the fracture and the age and general health
 of the patient. 