 Definition 
  Bone disorder drugs are medicines used to treat
 diseases that weaken the bones. 
 Purpose
 The drugs described here are used to treat or pre
vent osteoporosis (brittle bone disease) in women past
 menopause as well as older men. They also are used
 prescribed for Paget’s disease, a painful condition that
 weakens and deforms bones, and they are used to
 control calcium levels in the blood.
 Bone is living tissue. Like other tissue, bone is
 constantly being broken down and replaced with new
 material. Normally, there is a balance between the
 breakdown of old bone and its replacement with new
 bone. But when something goes wrong with the
 process, bone disorders may result.
 Osteoporosis is a particular concern for women
 after menopause, as well as for older men. In osteo
porosis, the inside of the bones become porous and thin. Over time, this condition weakens the bones
 and makes them more likely to break. Osteoporosis
 is four times more common in women than in men.
 This is because women have less bone mass than men,
 tend to live longer and take in less calcium, and need
 the female hormone estrogen to keep their bones
 strong. If men live long enough, they are also at risk
 of getting osteoporosis later in life. Once total bone
 masshaspeaked–aroundage35–alladultsstarttolose
 it. In women, the rate of bone loss speeds up during
 menopause, when estrogen levels fall. Bone loss may
 also occur if both ovaries are removed by surgery.
 Ovaries make estrogen. Hormone replacement therapy
 is one approach to preventing osteoporosis. However,
 not all people can use hormone replacement therapy.
 Bone disorder drugs are a good alternative for people
 who already have osteoporosis or who are at risk
 of developing it. Risk factors include lack of regular
 exercise, early menopause, being underweight, and a
 strong family history of osteoporosis.
 Description
 Bonedisorder drugsareavailable only with aphysi
cian’s prescription and come in tablet, nasal spray, and
 injectable forms. Commonly used bone disorder drugs
 are alendronate (Fosamax), calcitonin (Miacalcin,
 Calcimar), and raloxifene (Evista). Raloxifene belongs
 to a group of drugs known as selective estrogen recep
tor modulators (SERMs), which act like estrogen in
 some parts of the body but not in others. This makes
 the drugs less likely to cause some of the harmful
 effects that estrogen may cause. Unlike estrogen,
 raloxifene does not increase the risk of breast cancer.
 In fact, research suggests that raloxifene may even
 reduce that risk.
 Recommended dosage
 Alendronate
 FOROSTEOPOROSIS. The usual dose is 10 mg once
 a day. Treatment usually continues over many years.
 FOR PAGET’S DISEASE. The usual dose is 40 mg
 once a day for six months.
 This medicine works only when it is taken with a
 full glass of water first thing in the morning, at least 30
 minutes before eating or drinking anything or taking
 any other medicine. Do not lie down for at least 30
 minutes after taking it because the drug canirritate the
 esophagus, the tube that delivers food form the mouth
 to the stomach.
 Calcitonin
 NASALSPRAY. The usual dose is one spray into the
 nose once a day. Alternate nostrils, spraying the right
 nostril one day, the left nostril the next day, and so on.
 INJECTABLE. The recommended dosage depends
 on the condition for which the medicine is prescribed
 and may be different for different people. Check with
 the physician who prescribed the medicine or the
 pharmacist who filled the prescription for the proper
 dosage.
 Raloxifene
 The usual dose is one 60-mg tablet daily.
 Precautions
 Aldendronate
 People with low levels of calcium in their blood
 should not take this medicine. It also is not recom
mended for women on hormone replacement therapy
 or for anyone with kidney problems. Before using
 alendronate, anyone who has digestive or swallowing
 problems should make sure that his or her physician
 knows about the condition.
 Calcitonin
 Calcitonin nasal spray may cause irritation or
 small sores in the nose. Check with a physician if this becomes very uncomfortable or if there is bleeding
 from the nose.
 The injectable form of calcitonin has caused ser
ious allergic reactions in a few people. The nasal spray
 is not known to cause such reactions, but the possi
bility exists. Before starting treatment with calcitonin,
 the physician who prescribes the drug may order an
 allergy test to make sure there will not be a problem.
 Raloxifene
 A rare, but serious side effect of raloxifene is an
 increased risk of blood clots that form in the veins and
 may break away and travel to the lungs. This is about
 as likely in women who take raloxifene as it is in
 women who take estrogen. Because of this possible
 problem, women with a history of blood clots in
 their veins should not take raloxifene.
 Women who have had breast cancer or cancer of
 the uterus should check with their physicians about
 whether they can safely use raloxifene.
 General precautions for bone disorder drugs
 Tokeepbonesstrong,the bodyneedscalcium and
 vitamin D. Dairy products and fish such as salmon,
 sardinesandtunaaregoodsourcesofbothcalciumand
 vitamin D. People who are taking bone disorder drugs
 for osteoporosis and who do not get enough of these
 nutrients in their diets should check with their physi
cians about taking supplements. Other important
 bone-saving steps are avoiding smoking and alcohol
 and getting enough of the kind of exercise that puts
 weightonthebones(suchaswalkingorliftingweights).
 People who are taking these drugs because they
 have too much calcium in their blood may need to
 limit the amount of calcium in their diets. Too much
 calcium maypreventthemedicinefromworkingprop
erly. Discuss the proper diet with the physician who
 prescribed the drug, and do notmakeanydietchanges
 without the physician’s approval.
 Anyone who has had unusual reactions to bone
 disorder drugs in the past should let his or her physi
cian know before taking the drugs again. The physi
cian also should be told about any allergies to foods,
 dyes, preservatives, or other substances.
 Women who are pregnant or who may become
 pregnant and women who are breastfeeding should
 check with their physicians before using this alendro
nate or calcitonin. Raloxifene should not be used by
 women who are pregnant or who may become preg
nant. In laboratory studies of rats, raloxifene caused
 birth defects.
 Aldendronate
 Common side effects include constipation, diar
rhea, indigestion, nausea, pain in the abdomen, and
 pain in the muscles and bones. These problemsusually
 goawayasthebodyadjuststothemedicineanddonot
 need medical attention unless they continue or they
 interfere with normal activities.
 Calcitonin
 The most common side effects of calcitonin nasal
 spray are nose problems, such as dryness, redness,
 itching, sores, bleeding and general discomfort. These
 problems should go away as the body adjusts to the
 medicine, but if they do not or if they are very uncom
fortable, check with aphysician.Othersideeffects that
 should be brought to a physician’s attention include
 headache, back pain and joint pain.
 Injectable calcitonin may cause minor side effects
 such as nausea or vomiting; diarrhea; stomach pain;
 loss of appetite; flushing of the face, ears, hands or
 feet; and discomfort or redness at the place on the
 body where it is injected. Medical attention is not
 necessaryunlesstheseproblemspersistorcauseunusual
 discomfort.
 Anyone who has a skin rash or hives after taking
 injectable calcitonin should check with a physician as
 soon as possible.
 Raloxifene
 Common side effects include hot flashes, leg
 cramps, nausea and vomiting. Women who have these
 problems while taking raloxifene should check with
 their physicians.
 Interactions
 Aldendronate
 Taking aspirin with alendronate may increase the
 chance of upset stomach, especially if the dose of
 alendronate is more than 10 mg per day. If an analge
sic is necessary, switch to another drug, such as acet
aminophen (Tylenol) or use buffered aspirin. Ask a
 physician or pharmacist for the correct medication
 to use.
 Some calcium supplements, antacids and other
 medicines keep the body from absorbing alendronate.
 To prevent this problem, do not take any other med
icine within 30 minutes of taking alendronate. 
Calcitonin
 Calcitonin may keep certain other drugs for
 Paget’s disease, such as etidronate (Didronel), from
 working as they should.
 Raloxifene
 Raloxifene may affect blood clotting. Patients
 who are taking other drugs that affect blood clotting,
 such as warfarin (Coumadin), should check with their
 physicians before using raloxifene. 