 Definition
 Botulism is caused by botulinum toxin, a natural
 poison produced bycertain bacteria in the Clostridium
 genus. Exposure to the botulinum toxin occurs mostly
 from eating contaminated food, or in infants, from
 certain clostridia growing in the intestine. Botulinum
 toxin blocks motor nerves’ ability to release acetylcho
line, the neurotransmitter that relays nerve signals to
 muscles, and flaccid paralysis occurs. As botulism
 progresses, the muscles that control the airway and
 breathing fail.
 Description
 Botulism occurs rarely, but it causes concern
 because of its high fatality rate. Clinical descriptions
 of botulism possibly reach as far back in history as
 ancient Rome and Greece. However, the relationship
 between contaminated food and botulism wasn’t
 defined until the late 1700s. In 1793 the German physi
cian, Justinius Kerner, deduced that a substance in
 spoiled sausages, which he called wurstgift (German
 for sausage poison), caused botulism. The toxin’sorigin
 and identity remained elusive until Emile von
 Ermengem, a Belgian professor, isolated Clostridium
 botulinum in 1895 and identified it as the poison source.
 Threetypes ofbotulism have been identified: food
borne, wound, and infant botulism. The main differ
ence between types hinges on the route of exposure to
 the toxin. In the United States, there are approximately
 110 cases of botulism reported annually. Food-borne
 botulism accounts for 25% of all botulism cases and
 usually can be traced to eating contaminated home
preserved food. Infant botulism accounts for 72% of
 all cases, but the recovery rate is good (about 98%)
 with proper treatment. From 1990to2000,263 cases of
 food-borne cases were reported in the United States,
 most of them in Alaska. Though most were related to
 home canning, two restaurant-associated outbreaks
 affected 25 people.
 Though domestic food poisoning is a problem
 world-wide, there has been a growing concern regard
ing the use of botulism toxin in biological warfare and
 terrorist acts. The Iraqi government admitted in 1995
 that it had loaded 11,200 liters of botulinum toxin into
 SCUD missiles during the Gulf War. Luckily, these
 special missiles were never used. As of 1999, there
 were 17 countries known to be developing biological
 weapons, including the culture of botulism toxins.
 Causes and symptoms
 Toxin produced by the bacterium Clostridium botu
linum is the main culprit in botulism. Other members of
 the clostridium genus can produce botulinum toxin,
 namely C. argentinense, C. butyricum, andC. baratii,
 but they are minor sources. To grow, these bacteria
 require a low-acid, oxygen-free environment that is
 warm (40-120F or 4.4–48.8C) and moist. Lacking
 these conditions, the bacteria transform themselves into
 spores that, like plant seeds, can remain dormant for
 years. Clostridia and their spores exist all over the world,
 especially in soil and aquatic sediments. They do not
 threaten human or animal health until the spores
 encounter an environment that favors growth. The
 spores then germinate, and thegrowingbacteriaproduce
 the deadly botulism toxin.
 Scientists have discovered that clostridia can pro
duce at least seven types of botulism toxin, identified
 as A, B, C, D, E, F, and G. Humans are usually
 affected by A, B, E, and very rarely F. Domesticated
 animals such as dogs, cattle, and mink are affected by
 botulism C toxin, which also affects birds and has
 caused massive die-offs in domestic bird flocks and
 wild waterfowl. Botulism D toxin can cause illness in
 cattle, and horses succumb to botulism A, B, and C
 toxin. There have been noconfirmedhumanoranimal
 botulism cases linked to the G toxin.
 In humans, botulinum toxin latches onto specific
 proteins in nerve endings and irreversibly destroys
 them. These proteins control the release of acetylcholine,
 a neurotransmitter that stimulates muscle cells. With
 acetylcholine release blocked, nerves are not able to sti
mulate muscles. Ironically, botulinum toxin has found a
 beneficial niche in the world of medicine due to this  action. Certain medical disorders are characterized by
 involuntary and uncontrollable muscle contractions.
 Medical researchers have discovered that injecting a
 strictly controlled dose of botulinum toxin into affected
 muscles inhibits excessive muscle contractions. The
 muscle is partially paralyzed and normal movement is
 retained.ThisiscommonlyreferredtoasBotoxinjection.
 The three types of human botulism include the
 following symptoms:
 Food-borne. Food that has been improperly preser
ved or stored can harbor botulinum toxin-producing
 clostridia. Botulism symptoms typically appear within
 18-36 hours of eating contaminated food, with
 extremes of four hours to eight days. Initial symptoms
 include blurred or doublevision and difficulty swallow
ing and speaking. Possible gastrointestinal problems
 include constipation, nausea,andvomiting. As botulism
 progresses, the victim experiences weakness or paraly
sis, starting with the head muscles and progressing
 down the body. Breathing becomes increasingly diffi
cult. Withoutmedicalcare,respiratoryfailure anddeath
 are very likely.
 Infant. Infant botulism was first described in 1976.
 Unlike adults, infants younger than 12 months are
 vulnerable to C. botulinum colonizing the intestine.
 Infants ingest spores in honey or simply by swallow
ing spore-containing dust. The spores germinate in
 the large intestine and, as the bacteria grow, they
 produce botulinum toxin that is absorbed into the
 infant’s body. The first symptoms include constipa
tion, lethargy, and poor feeding. As infant botulism
 progresses, sucking and swallowing (thus eating)
 become difficult. A nursing mother will often notice
 breast engorgement as the first sign of her infant’s
 illness. The baby suffers overall weakness and cannot
 control head movements. Because of the flaccid
 paralysis of the muscles, the baby appears ‘‘floppy.’’
 Breathing is impaired, and death from respiratory
 failure is a very real danger.
 Wound. Confirmed cases of wound botulism have
 been linked to trauma such as severe crush injuries to
 the extremities, surgery, and illegal drug use. Wound
 botulism occurs when clostridia colonize an infected
 woundandproducebotulinumtoxin.Thesymptoms
 usually appear four to 18 days after an injury occurs
 and are similar to food-borne botulism, although
 gastrointestinal symptoms may be absent.
 Diagnosis
 Diagnosis of botulism can be tricky because symp
tomsmimicthosepresentedbyotherdiseases.Botulism
 may be confused with Guillain-Barre syndrome,
 myasthenia gravis, drug reactions, stroke, or nervous
 system infection, intoxications (e.g. carbon monoxide
 or atropine), or shellfish poisoning. Sepsis is the most
 commoninitialdiagnosisfor infant botulism. Failure to
 thrive may also be suspected. Some reports have linked  infant botulism to 5-15% of sudden infant death syn
drome (SIDS, crib death) cases. Laboratory tests are
 used for definitive diagnosis, but if botulism seems
 likely, treatment starts immediately.
 While waiting for laboratory results, doctors ask
 about recently consumed food and work to dismiss
 other disease possibilities. A physical examination is
 done with anemphasis on the nervous system. As part
 of this examination, CT scans, MRIs, electromyo
graphic tests, or lumbar punctures may be ordered.
 Laboratory tests involve testing a suspected food and/
 or the patient’s serum, feces, or other specimens for
 traces of botulinum toxin or clostridia.
 Treatment
 Drugs
 Adults with botulism are treated with an antitoxin
 derived from horse serum that is distributed by the
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The anti
toxin (effective against toxin types A, B, and E) inac
tivates only the botulinum toxin that is unattached to
 nerve endings. Early injection of antitoxin (usually
 within 24 hours of onset of symptoms) can preserve
 nerve endings, prevent progression of the disease, and
 reduce mortality.
 Infants, however, cannot receive the antitoxin
 used for adults. For them, human botulism immune
 globulin (BIG) is available in the United States
 through the Infant Botulism Treatment and
 Prevention Program in Berkeley, California. BIG neu
tralizes toxin types A, B, C, D, and E before they can
 bind to nerves. This antitoxin can provide protection
 against A and B toxins for approximately four
 months. Though many infants recover with suppor
tive care, BIG cuts hospital stay in half, and therefore
 reduces hospital costs by 50% as well.
 Aside from antitoxin, no drugs are used to treat
 botulism. Antibiotics are not effective for preventing
 or treating botulism. In fact, antibiotic use is discour
aged for infants because dying bacteria could poten
tially release more toxin into a baby’s system.
 Antibiotics can be used, however, to treat secondary
 respiratory tract and other infections.
 Respiratory support
 Treatment for infants usually involves intensive
 respiratory support and tube feeding for weeks or
 even months. Once an infant can breathe unaided,
 physical therapy is initiated to help the child relearn
 howtosuckandswallow.Arespiratorisoftenrequired
 to help adult patients breathe, and a tracheostomy may
 also be necessary.
 Surgery may be necessary to clean an infected
 wound and remove the source of the bacteria that is
 producing the toxin. Antimicrobial therapy may be
 necessary.
 Gastric lavage
 Whenbotulismiscausedbyfood,itoften is neces
sary to flush the gastrointestinal tract (gastric lavage).
 Often cathartic agents or enemas are used. It is impor
tant to avoid products that contain magnesium,
 since magnesium enhances the effect of the toxin.
 Prognosis
 With medical intervention, botulism victims can
 recover completely, though slowly. It takes weeks to
 months to recover from botulism, and severe cases
 can take years before a total recovery is attained.
 Recovery depends on the nerve endings building
 newproteinstoreplacethosedestroyedbybotulinum
 toxin.
 Prevention
 Vaccines against botulism do not exist to pre
vent infant botulism or other forms of the disease.
 However, scientists announced in 2004 that they
 had successfully vaccinated mice and ducks against
 type C and D, which may help lead to vaccines for
 humans. Food safety is the surest prevention for botu
lism. Botulinum toxin cannot be seen, smelled, or
 tasted, so the wisest course is to discard any food that
 seems spoiled without tasting it. Home canners must be
 diligent about using sterile equipment and following
 U.S. Department of Agriculture canning guidelines. If
 any part of a canned food container is rusty or bulging,
 the food should not be eaten. Infant botulism is diffi
cult to prevent, because controlling what goes into an
 infant’s mouth is often beyond control, especially in
 regard to spores in the air. One concrete preventive is
 to never feed honey to infants younger than 12 months
 since it is one known source of botulism spores. As
 infants begin eating solid foods, the same food precau
tions should be followed as for adults.