Definition
 Botulinum is a bacterium (Clostridium botulinum)
 that produces seven different toxins that can cause
 botulism and is also medically used to block muscle
 contractions.
 Purpose
 Botulinum toxin (Botox) injection is used in
 conditions of excessive and inappropriate muscle
 contraction, spasticity (persistent states of muscle
 contraction), sphincter contraction, eye-movement
 disorders, tics and tremors, and cosmetically to
 treat facial lines and wrinkles. The FDA approved
 Botox for treating excessive underarm sweating in
 2004.
 Botox has also been used in the treatment of
 chronic muscle tension and migraine headaches. The
 relief is likely due to the decrease in localized muscle
 spasms, as no direct effect of Botox on the sensory
 nerves has been established. Researchers in New
 Zealand were testing Botox as means to help improve
 movement in children with a form of cerebral palsy
 called hemiplegia in 2004. The application of the ther
apyseemstobegrowingcontinuouslybeyonditsmore
 popularly known cosmetic uses. 
  Precautions
 Botulinum toxin is produced from the bacterium
 that causes food poisoning in humans. High doses of
 the toxin can be fatal; however, doses administered
 therapeutically are so small that harmful effects are
 uncommon.
 Description
 The number of potential applications for botuli
num toxin extends to every muscle group. The first
 therapeutic use of Botox was in the treatment of
 strabismus (eyes are unable to direct toward the same
 object) andsince thenit hasbeenusedtotreatavariety
 of involuntary muscle contractions or disorders. Its
 cosmetic use is the result of treatment for facial spasms
 where smoothing of facial lines was reported by
 patients. In general, 90% of injections for facial
 spasms are resolved satisfactorily.
 Toxin type A has a duration of effect that lasts
 approximately three months and is the therapeutic
 agent of choice for most conditions.
 Preparation
 The dosage of Botox must be monitored and
 adjusted, with multiple injections showing a lower
 incidence of complications versus administration by
 one larger dose.
 Risks
 In over 30 years of therapeutic use in humans,
 botulinum toxin has proven to be remarkably safe.
 Difficulties associated with administration of toxin
 are: different patients may experience different effects
 at the same dose, patients new to the treatment may
 experience exaggerated effects at subsequent visits
 and/or neighboring muscles may become activated at
 subsequent treatments. Patients should ask about
 their provider s experience with injecting Botox before
 proceeding with the procedure.
 Additional side effects may include excessive mus
cle weakness at the injection site or adjacent muscles.
 These effects typically resolve quickly. Occasionally,
 patients report flu-like symptoms but they are usually
 self-limited.
 Acertain percentage of patients may also experi
ence resistance to the toxin. The presence of circulat
ing antibodies to the toxin is presumed to be the
 primary reason for resistance to Botox injections.
 Patients who have little reaction to Botox ‘A’ may
 benefit from injections using one of the other six
 serotypes. Using the smallest effective dose limits the
 likelihood of immunoresistance in unresponsive
 patients.
 Normal results
 The anticipated outcome of Botox injections is
 relaxation of the target muscle tissue. The pharmaco
logical effects of botulinum toxin are typically isolated
 to local areas and do not result in tissue destruction or
 prolonged paralysis. Varying the dose can deliver a
 precise amount of toxin to achieve graded degrees of
 paralysis for the desired level of response.
 Abnormal results
 Most side effects, such as weakness in the injected
 muscle or overall muscle soreness, will go away
 quickly. Some patients have received too much of the
 substance when having Botox for cosmetic purposes
 and have been unhappy with the results. Physicians
 and patients should discuss the procedure and the
 amount to be used. Many clinicians believe that it is
 best to err on the side of low dosage with a return trip
 for more, rather than too high a dosage that might
 result in unwanted cosmetic effects.