Definition
 Abowelresection is a surgical procedure in which
 a part of the large or small intestine is removed.
 Purpose
 Bowel resection may be performed to treat var
ious disorders of the intestine, including cancer,
 obstruction, inflammatory bowel disease, ruptured
 diverticulum, ischemia (compromised blood supply),
 or traumatic injury.
 Description
 The preferred type of bowel resection involves
 removal of the diseased portion of intestine, and sur
gically re-joining the remaining ends. In this proce
dure, the continuity of the bowel is maintained and
 normal passage of stool is preserved. When deemed
 necessary by the surgeon, the diseased portion of the
 bowel may be removed, and the functioning end of
 the intestine may be brought out onto the surface of
 the abdomen, forming an temporary or permanent
 ostomy. Use of the large intestine to form the ostomy
 results in a colostomy; useof small intestinetoform the
 ostomy results in an ileostomy.
 Preparation
 Aswithanysurgical procedure, the patient will be
 required to sign a consent form after the procedure is
 explained thoroughly. Blood and urine studies, along
 with various x rays and an electrocardiogram (EKG)
 may be ordered as the doctor deems necessary. In
 order to empty and cleanse the bowel, the patient
 may be placed on a low residue diet for several days
 prior to surgery. A liquid diet may be ordered for at
 least the day before surgery, with nothing taken by
 mouth after midnight. A series of enemas and/or oral
 preparations (GoLytely or Colyte), may be ordered to
 empty the bowel of stool. Oral anti-infectives (neomy
cin, erythromycin, or kanamycin sulfate) may be
 ordered to decrease bacteria in the intestine and help
 prevent post-operative infection. A nasogastric tube is
 inserted through the nose into the stomach on the day
 of surgery or during surgery. This removes the gastric
 secretions and preventsnausea andvomiting. Aurinary
 catheter (thin tube inserted into the bladder) may also
 be inserted to keep the bladder empty during surgery,
 giving more space in the surgical field and decreasing
 chances of accidental injury. 
 Aftercare
 Post-operative care for the patient who has had a
 bowelresection, as withthosewhohavehadanymajor
 surgery, involves monitoring of blood pressure, pulse,
 respirations, and temperature. Breathing tends to be
 shallow because of the effect of anesthesia and the
 patient’s reluctance to breathe deeply and experience
 pain that is caused by the abdominal incision. The
 patient is instructed how to support the operative site
 during deep breathing and coughing, and is given pain
 medication as necessary. Fluid intake and output is
 measured, and the operative site is observed for color
 and amount of wound drainage. The nasogastric tube
 will remain in place, attached to low intermittent suc
tion until bowel activity resumes. Fluids and electro
lytes are infused intravenously until the patient’s diet
 can gradually be resumed, beginning with liquids and
 advancing to a regular diet as tolerated. The patient is
 generally out of bed approximately eight to 24 hours
 after surgery. Postoperative weight loss follows almost
 all bowel resections. Weight and strength are slowly
 regained over a period of months.
 Risks
 Potential complications of this abdominal surgery
 include:
 excessive bleeding
 surgical wound infection
 incisional hernia (An organ projects through the
 muscle wall that surrounds it. The hernia occurs
 through the surgical scar.)
 thrombophlebitis (inflammation and blood clot to
 veins in the legs) 
 pneumonia
 pulmonary embolism (blood clot or air bubble in the
 lungs’ blood supply)
 Normal results
 Complete healing is expected without complica
tions after bowel resection. The period of time
 required for recovery from the surgery may vary
 depending of the patient’s overall health status prior
 to surgery.
 Abnormal results
 The doctor should be made aware of any of the
 following problems after surgery:
 increased pain, swelling, redness, drainage, or bleed
ing in the surgical area
 headache, muscle aches, dizziness, fever
 increasedabdominalpainorswelling,constipation,nau
sea or vomiting, rectal bleeding, or black, tarry stools