 Definition
 Bowel training helps to reestablish normal bowel
 movements in persons who suffer from constipation,
 diarrhea, incontinence, or irregularity. Healthy bowel
 activity is considered one or two movements of mod
erate size every day.
 Purpose
 Many people for many reasons have irregular
 bowel function. In some cases, the irregularity lasts
 beyond the condition that caused it. The bowels by
 themselves develop bad habits that can be retrained
 with suitable exercises and education. Normal bowel  habits not only improve the quality of life, they help
 prevent several common diseases–for example, diver
ticulitis and fecal impaction. Gall stones, appendicitis,
 colon cancer, hiatal hernia, diabetes, and heart disease
 have also been related to the quality of bowel move
ments and the foods that affect them.
 One of the most common causes of constipation is
 the laxative habit. Repeated artificial stimulation of
 the bowels destroys their natural emptying reflex, so
 that they will no longer move without artificial sti
mulants. The laxative habit begins innocently
 enough with the correct belief that bowels should
 move every day, however, laxatives will cause the
 evacuation of several days worth of stool in a single
 movement. Impatient for stool to reaccumulate for
 the necessary few days, the patient takes another
 laxative, and the cycle begins.
 The other major cause of constipation is a diet with
 insufficient bulk or roughage. The bowel worksmore
 smoothly the more contents it has. Western diets of
 highly refined foods have eliminated most of the
 residue from food. The result is that most food is
 absorbed, leaving little to pass through and be
 excreted as feces.
 Constipation occurs acutely with impaction–the pre
sence in the rectum of a mass of feces too large to
 pass. Fecal impaction is usually the result of poor
 bowel habits, a diet with too little liquid and rough
age, and inadequate physical activity.
 Diarrhea, whether acute or chronic, can disrupt the
 bowel’s normal rhythm and lead to irregularity.
 Several diseases of the nervous system affect bowel
 reflexes.
 Description
 Bowel training reestablishes the bowel’s normal
 reflexes by repeating a routine until it becomes a habit. 
  Naturally the patient must be able and willing to
 cooperate. Some patients are so convinced they need
 daily laxatives that they are afraid to do without them.
 It takes timefor achangeddiettoeffectthebowelsand
 for the bowel to regain its normal rhythm. Trust and
 patience are necessary.
 After gaining the patient’s cooperation, the next
 step is to optimize the diet. Healthy bowel movements
 require ingestion of a large amount of liquids and bulk
 foods. The patient should drink two to three quarts of
 liquids every day, with liberal inclusion of prune juice
 andperhapscoffeefortheirnaturallaxativeeffect.Bulk
 comes from unrefined foods. Oat bran, wheat bran,
 brown rice, green vegetables, apples, and pears are a
 few examples of high residue foods. Many patients will
 benefit from adding bulk preparations of psyllium.
 Constipating foods like bananas and cheese should be
 avoided until a natural rhythm is well established.
 Toassurethat stools are soft enough to pass easily,
 it is a good idea to add a pure stool softener like DOSS
 (dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate), two to four per day as
 needed. DOSS also helps prevent impaction.
 There is usually a time of day when bowel move
ments are more likely to occur. In anticipation of this
 time, the patient should participate in activities that
 stimulate a normal bowel movement. Walking, eating
 unrefined foods, and drinking prune juice or coffee,
 encourage natural evacuation. It is acceptable to use
 lubricants such as glycerine suppositories or oil ene
mas at this time. For severe constipation, water ene
mas may be needed to initiate a movement.
 It is also important for the patient to recognize the
 urge to defecate and to respond right away to that
 urge. The longer stool sits in the rectum, the more
 water the rectum will absorb from it, making it harder
 and more difficult to pass.
 Normal results
 With patience and diligence, normal bowel habits
 and the health that comes with them will return in
 most patients.