 Definition
 Abraintumorisanabnormalgrowthoftissue in
 the brain. Unlike other tumors, brain tumors spread
 by local extension and rarely metastasize (spread)
 outside the brain. A benign brain tumor is composed
 of non-cancerous cells and does not metastasize
 beyond the part of the brain where it originates. A
 brain tumor is considered malignant if it contains
 cancer cells, or if it is composed of harmless cells
 located in an area where it suppresses one or more
 vital functions.
 Description
 Each year, more than 17,000 brain tumors are
 diagnosed in the United States. About half of all pri
mary brain tumors are benign, but in life-threatening
 locations. The rest are malignant and invasive.
 Benign brain tumors
 Benign brain tumors, composed of harmless cells,
 have clearly defined borders, can usually be comple
tely removed, and are unlikely to recur. Benign brain
 tumors do not infiltrate nearby tissues but can cause
 severe pain, permanent brain damage, and death.
 Benign brain tumors sometimes become malignant.
 Malignant brain tumors
 Malignant brain tumors do not have distinct bor
ders. They tend to grow rapidly, increasing pressure
 within the brain (IICP) and can spread in the brain or
 spinal cord beyond the pointwherethey originate. It is
 highly unusual for malignant brain tumors to spread
 beyond the central nervous system (CNS).
 Primary brain tumors
 Primary brain tumors originate in the brain. They
 represent about 1% of all cancers and 2.5% of all
 cancer deaths.
 Metastatic or secondary brain tumors
 Approximately 25%ofallcancerpatientsdevelop
 secondary or metastatic brain tumors when cancer
 cells spread from another part of the body to the
 brain. Secondary brain tumors are most apt to occur
 in patients who have:
 breast cancer.
 colon cancer.
 kidney cancer.
 lung cancer.
 melanoma (cancer) of the skin. These metastatic
 brain tumors can develop on any part of the brain
 or spinal cord.
 cancer within the nasal passages and/or throat that
 follow the nerve pathways into the skull, and metas
tasize to the brain.
Whogets brain tumors
 Types of brain tumors
 Brain tumor
 Brain tumors can develop at any age, but are
 most common in children between the ages of 3-12,
 and in adults aged 55-65. Primary brain cancer is the
 second most common cause of cancer death between
 birth and the age of 34, and the fourth most common
 cause of cancer death in men aged 35-54. Primary
 tumors of the brain and central nervous system are
 often associated with HIV infection. Men and cau
casians have a higher risk of developing brain
 tumors. Other risk factors being studied include chil
dren with a history of previous radiation treatment
 to the head for cancer; parents with certain cancers
 (nervous system, salivary gland, colon); having an
 older father; having well-educated parents; occupa
tional exposure to vinyl chloride, lead, and pesti
cides; history of epilepsy; history of certain genetic
 conditions (tuberous sclerosis, neurofibromatosis, von
 Hippel Lindau, familial polyposis, Osler-Weber
Rendu, Li-Fraumeni).
 Naming and grading brain tumors
 The name of a brain tumor describes where it
 originates, how it grows, and what kind of cells it
 contains. A tumor in an adult is also graded or staged
 according to:
 how malignant it is
 how rapidly it is growing and how likely it is to
 invade other tissues
 howclosely its cells resemble normal cells. (The more
 abnormal a tumor cell looks, the faster it is likely to
 grow)
 Low-grade brain tumors usually have well
defined borders. Some low-grade brain tumors form
 or are enclosed (encapsulated) in cysts. Low-grade
 brain tumors grow slowly, if at all. They may spread
 throughout the brain, but rarely metastasize to other
 parts of the body.
 Mid-grade and high-grade tumors grow more
 rapidly than low-grade tumors. Described as ‘‘truly
 malignant,’’ these tumors usually infiltrate healthy
 tissue. The growth pattern makes it difficult to remove
 the entire tumor, and these tumors recur more often
 than low-grade tumors.
 Asingle brain tumor can contain several different
 types of cells. The tumor’s grade is determined by the
 highest-grade (most malignant) cell detected under a
 microscope, even if most of the cells in the tumor are
 less malignant. An infiltrating tumor is a tumor of any
 grade that grows into surrounding tissue.
 Glioma is the term used to refer to the most pre
valent primary brain tumors. Gliomas arise from glial
 tissue, which supports and nourishes cells that send
 messages from the brain to other parts of the body.
 These tumors may be either malignant or benign.
 Astrocytomas, ependymomas, and mixed gliomas are
 three of the most common gliomas.
 ASTROCYTOMAS. Namedforthe star-like shape of
 their cells, astrocytomas can develop on any part of
 the brain or spinal cord. Non-infiltrating astrocyto
mas grow slowly, and rarely spread to nearby tissue.
 Mild-to-moderately anaplastic astrocytomas with
 well-differentiated borders do not grow as slowly as
 non-infiltrating astrocytomas, and they do spread to
 surrounding tissues.
 Anaplastic astrocytomas, which are also called
 Grade III astrocytomas, look more abnormal and
 grow more rapidly than non-infiltrating or mild-to
moderately anaplastic tumors.
 Grade IV astrocytomas are also called glioblas
tomamultiforme(GBM)tumors.Accountingfor30%
 of all primary brain tumors, GBMs are the most com
mon brain tumors in middle-aged adults. GBMs are
 the most malignant of all brain tumors. Because they
 contain a greater mixture of cells than any other brain
 tumor, they are the most difficult to treat.
 EPENDYMOMAS. Also called ependymal tumors,
 ependymomas account for 9% of all gliomas, and
 5% of all intracranial tumors. These tumors, which
 are mostcommoninchildrenandadolescents,beginin
 the very thin membranes that help form cerebrospinal
 fluid (CSF) and line the brain cavities (ventricles) that
 contain it.
 Ependymomas are usually benign, have well
differentiated borders, resemble normal cells, and
 grow very slowly. The cells of anaplastic (malignant)
 ependymomas look abnormal and grow more rapidly
 than the cells of benign tumors.
 MIXEDGLIOMAS. Theseheterogeneoustumorscon
tain elements of astrocytomas and ependymomas and/
 or oligodendrogliomas. These are rare tumors that
 usually occur in middle-aged adults, grow slowly, and
 donotusuallyspreadbeyondthepartofthebrainwhere
 they originate. Mixed gliomas behave like tumors com
posed of the highest-grade cells they contain.
 Non-glial brain tumors
 The most common brain tumors that do not
 develop from glial cells are medulloblastomas, menin
giomas, and Schwannomas. 
 MEDULLOBLASTOMAS. Scientists once thought
 medulloblastomas (MDLs) developed from glial
 cells. These fast-growing, malignant tumors are now
 believed to originate in developing cells not normally
 present in the body after birth. They are sometimes
 called primitive neurodectal tumors (PNET).
 MDL tumors are most common in children and
 are more common in boys than in girls. Only 30% of
 MDL tumors occur in adults. MDL tumors usually
 originate in the cerebellum (the part of the brain that
 controls coordination and some muscle activity), and
 are often carried to other parts of the brain by cere
brospinal fluid. MDL tumors rarely metastasize
 beyond the brain and spinal cord.
 MENINGIOMAS. Meningiomas, which represent
 more than 20%ofallprimary brain tumors, originate in
 the membranes that enclose the brain and spinal cord
 (meninges). These tumors are usually benign and most
 oftenoccurinwomenaged30-50yearsold.Meningiomas
 grow so slowly that the brain can sometimes become
 accustomed to their presence. Meningiomas compress,
 rather than invade, brain tissue and may grow to be
 quite large before any symptoms appear.
 SCHWANNOMAS. Schwannomas originate in the
 Schwann cells. These cells produce myelin, material
 that protects the acoustic nerve, which controls hear
ing. These benign tumors are twice as common in
 women as in men, and are most often diagnosed in
 patients between the ages 30-60.
 Schwannomas grow very slowly, and many people
 adapt to the slight hearing loss and balance problems
 that are the tumors’ earliest symptoms. A pear-shaped
 Schwannomacancausesuddenorgraduallossofhear
ing in an ear. As the tumor progresses, it can press on
 the nerves that control movement and feeling in the
 face, and cause headaches and facial numbness or
 tingling. The patient may have trouble walking, swal
lowing, or controlling eye movements, and the sense of
 taste can be affected. A Schwannoma that grows large
 enough to press on the brainstem can be deadly.
 CHILDHOOD BRAIN TUMORS. Brain tumors
 that occur in children are described as supratentorial
 (in the upper part of the brain) or infratentorial (in
 the lowest part of the brain). Astrocytomas and epen
dymomas are common supratentorial tumors.
 Infratentorial tumors include medulloblastomas,
 astrocytomas, and ependymomas.
 Causes and symptoms
 The cause of primary brain tumors is unknown,
 but people who work with rubber and certain
 chemicals have agreater-than-average risk of develop
ing them. There is no evidence that head injury causes
 brain tumors, but researchers are trying to determine
 the relationship, if any, between brain tumors and
 viruses, family history, and long-term exposure to
 electromagnetic fields.
 Symptoms do not usually appear until the tumor
 grows large enough to displace, damage, or destroy
 delicate brain tissue. When that happens, the patient
 may experience:
 headaches that become increasingly painful and are
 most painful when lying down
 nausea and vomiting or sudden attacks of vomiting
 not accompanied by nausea
 seizures
 dizziness, loss of coordination or balance
 personality changes
 sudden loss of vision
 memory loss
 speech problems
 sensory changes
 mental impairment
 weakness or paralysis on one side of the body
 A doctor should be notified whenever a patient
 experiences one or more of the symptoms.
 Diagnosis
 Although brain tumor symptoms resemble those
 of many other illnesses, the presence of a brain tumor
 may be indicated by:
 persistent headaches with vomiting or convulsions
 progressive deterioration of sight, speech, hearing,
 touch; or deterioration in the ability to use an arm,
 hand, foot, or leg
 When a patient experiences one or more of the
 above symptoms, a primary care physician will per
form a complete physical examination, take a detailed
 medical history, and conduct a basic neurologic exam
ination to evaluate:
 balance and coordination
 abstract thinking and memory
 eye movements
 hearing, touch, and sense of smell
 reflexes
 control of facial muscles and movements of the head
 and tongue
 awareness
 If the results of these examinations suggest a
 patient may have a brain tumor, a neurologist recom
mends some or all of these additional diagnostic tests:
 computed tomography scan (CT scan) to reveal
 brain abnormalities
 magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to detect tumors
 beneath the bones of the skull
 complex imaging techniques such as Positron emis
sion tomography (PET scan), Single photon emission
 tomography (SPECT scan)
 electroencephalography (EEG) to measure electrical
 activity in the brain
 magnetoencephalography (MEG scan) to measure
 the magnetic fields produced by nerve cells and
 their electric currents
 x rays to reveal any distortion in the bones of the
 skull
 angiography to outline atumor andthebloodvessels
 that lead to it
 a brain scan to identify and record the location of
 abnormal cells in the brain
 radionuclide brain scintigraphy to view the capil
laries feeding the tumor after highlighting them
 with a radioactive substance
 myelography (x ray of the spine) to detect a spinal
 cord tumor
 a lumbar puncture (spinal tap) to obtain spinal fluid,
 which may contain tumor cells.
 digital holography to view a complete three-dimen
sional map of the tumor and surrounding brain
 structures
 Interpreting these images and results of labora
tory analysis allows neurologists to determine whether
 a tumor is present, but microscopic examination of
 tumor tissue (biopsy) is the only way to identify the
 kind of cells it contains.
 Treatment
 Brain tumors are treated by multidisciplinary
 teams of highly skilled specialists whose decisions are
 based on:
 results of diagnostic tests
 tumor size, position, and growth pattern
 the patient’s health history and current medical
 status
 the wishes of the patient and his family
 Surgery
 Surgery is the treatment of choice for accessible
 brain tumors, which can be removed without causing
 serious neurologic damage. The procedure most often
 performed is a craniotomy, but the goals of any type of
 brain tumor surgery include:
 removing as much of the tumor as possible (called
 debulking the tumor)
 removing tumor tissue for microscopic analysis
 allowing neurosurgeons to see exactly how thetumor
 is situated and how it is growing
 creating an entry channel for chemotherapy drugs
 and forms of radiation that are implanted in the
 brain
 Depending on the type of brain tumor, its loca
tion, and its size, a number ofdifferent techniques may
 be used to surgically remove it. Surgical techniques
 include:
 classic operation
 laser microsurgery (uses high temperatures to vapor
ize tumor cells
 ultrasonic aspiration (uses ultrasound waves to
 break up the tumor into smaller bits which can be
 ‘‘vacuumed’’ out
 Before undergoing brain surgery, patients are
 often given:
 steroids to reduce swelling of brain tissue
 anticonvulsant medications to prevent or control
 seizures
 radiation treatments to reduce tumor size
 Patients whose benign brain tumors can be com
pletely removed may not require any additional treat
ment, but periodic physical and neurologic
 examinations and CT or MRI scans are sometimes
 recommended to determine whether the tumor has
 returned. Because surgeons cannot be sure that every
 bit of an infiltrating or metastasizing tumor has been
 removed, radiation and chemotherapy are used to
 eradicate cells that may have escaped the scalpel.
 If a tumor cannot be completely removed, remov
ing a portion of it (debulking) can alleviate the
 patient’s symptoms, enhance the sense of well-being,
 and increase the effectiveness of other treatments. 
  Radiation therapy
 External radiotherapy, generally delivered on an
 outpatient basis, directs radiation to the tumor andthe
 area around it. Implant radiation therapy involves
 placing tiny pieces of radioactive material in the
 brain. Left in place permanently, or for a short time,
 these radioactive pellets release measured doses of
 radiation each day. This technique is called bra
chytherapy. Patients are usually hospitalized during
 the several days the pellets are most active.
 Stereoactic radiosurgery involves fitting the
 patientwithaframetostabilizethehead,usingimaging
 techniques to determine the exact location of tumor
 cells, and using a sophisticated instrument to adminis
ter radiation precisely to that point. Instruments used
 for delivery of radiation include the gamma knife,
 adapted linear accelerator (LINAC), and cyclotron.
 Avariety of drugs mayalso begiven during radia
tion therapy, to protect brain cells from the effects of
 radiation (radioprotective drugs), to increase the sen
sitivity of tumor cells to radiation (radiosensitizers), or
 to boost radiation’s effects (radioenhancers).
 Chemotherapy
 Oneormorecancer-killing drugs may be taken by
 mouth or injected into a blood vessel, muscle, or the
 cerebrospinal fluid. Chemotherapy may be used with
 radiation and surgery as part of a patient’s initial
 treatment, or used alone to treat tumors that recur in
 the same place or in another part of the body. The
 usual chemotherapy regimen for a brain tumor is a
 combination approach, most commonly using procar
bazine, CCNU, and vincristine.
 New methods of delivering chemotherapy are
 being used as well. These include:
 interstitial chemotherapy is performed at the time of
 surgery. A chemotherapy-soaked wafer is placed in
 the cavity left after tumor removal.
 Intrathecal chemotherapy instills the medications
 right into the spinal fluid.
 Intraarterial chemotherapy uses tiny catheter tubes
 to delivery high-dose chemotherapy directly into the
 arteries of the brain.
 Potentially toxic chemotherapy drugs can be
 wrapped in special biologic envelopes called lipo
somes, to allow the drugs to be delivered to the
 tumor without adversely affecting other healthy tis
sues along the way.
 Electrochemotherapy uses electric voltage to trans
port chemotherapy agents into the brain.
 When a young child has a brain tumor, che
motherapy is often used to eliminate or delay the
 need for radiation.
 Other treatments
 If a brain tumor cannot be cured, treatment is
 designed to make the patient as comfortable as possi
ble and preserve as muchofhisneurologicfunctioning
 as possible. The patient’s doctor may prescribe:
 analgesics to relieve pain
 anticancer drugs to limit tumor growth
 anticonvulsants to control seizures
 steroids to reduce swelling of brain tissue
 Potential therapies
 Scientists are studying ways to empower che
motherapy drugs to penetrate the blood-brain barrier
 (which protects the CNS by separating the brain
 from blood circulating throughout the body), and
 attack cancer cells that have infiltrated tissue
 inside it. Agents under investigation include both
 mannitol and substances called receptor-mediated
 permeabilizers
 Brain tumor researchers are also investigating:
 Less invasive surgical procedures.
 Monoclonal antibodies, which pair antibodies with
 radioactive substances. The antibodies are directed
 to find and attach to tumor cells, at which time the
 radioactive substance kills the tumor cell.
 Interleukin and interferon, which aresubstancespro
duced naturally by the human immune system which
 seem to kill tumor cells. Scientists seek to produce
 these substances in the laboratory and incorporate
 their use in brain tumor treatment.
 T-lymphocytes, which are also produced normally
 by the human immune system, and are being used
 to inject directly into the tumor location during sur
gery andtoinfuseintothe bloodstream after surgery,
 in the hopes that they will boost the immunesystem’s
 ability to fight tumor cells.
 Tumorvaccines, whichuseelements oftumor cellsto
 stimulate the patient’s immune system.
 Methods of incorporating chemotherapy drugs into
 tumor cells to reduce the need for radiation.
 Laboratory techniques that enable physicians to
 select the chemotherapy drugs most likely to kill
 particular types of tumors. 
 Gene therapy in which genetically engineered mate
rial is transported to tumor cells by viruses that infect
 tumor cells and convert them to normal cells, stop
 their growth, or kill them.
 Alternative treatment
 Alternative treatments have not been shown to
 cure brain tumors and should never be substituted
 for conventional therapy. However, complementary
 therapies (used with, not instead of, standard treat
ments) can help some patients cope with the stress of
 their illness and side effects of their treatment.
 Massage, meditation, and reflexology help some
 patients relax; while yoga is said to soothe the body,
 spirit, and mind. Hydrotherapy uses ice, liquid, and
 steam to improve circulation and relieve pain.
 Therapeutic touch practitioners say they can relieve
 pain and other symptoms by moving their hands in
 slow, rhythmic motions several inches above the
 patient’s body.
 Botanical therapies, homeopathic treatment, tra
ditional Chinese medicine treatments, nutritional
 focuses on diet and supplements, and detoxification
 can also be incorporated as complementary therapies.
 Prognosis
 The patient’s prognosis depends on where the
 tumor is located, what type of cells it contains, the
 size of the tumor, and the effect its already had on
 adjacent brain structures. A patient whose tumor is
 discovered early and removed completely may make a
 full recovery, but the surgeryitself can harmordestroy
 normal brain tissue and cause:
 problems with thought, speech, and coordination
 seizures
 weakness
 personality changes.
 Although these post-operative problems may
 initially be more severe than the symptoms produced
 bythetumor,theywillprobablydiminishordisappear
 in time.
 Occupational therapy can teach patients and their
 families new ways to approach daily tasks. Physical
 therapy can benefit patients who have difficulty keep
ing their balance, expressing their thoughts, speaking,
 or swallowing. Children may need special tutors before
 and after returning to school. For patients who have
 incurable brain tumors, hospice care may be available.
 Hospices provide a supportive environment and help
 patients manage pain and remain comfortable.
 Consequences of radiation therapy
 Cells killed by radiation can cluster in the brain,
 resembling tumors. They can cause headaches, sei
zures, and memory loss. Children treated with radia
tion may lose some of their eyesight and develop
 learning problems. Radiation damage to the pituitary
 gland can hinder normal growth and development.
 Consequences of chemotherapy
 Some drugs used to treat brain tumors can cause
 kidney damage and temporary or permanent tingling
 in the fingers and ringing in the ears.
 Inoperable tumors
 Brain tumors that cannot be removed may cause
 irreversible brain damage and death.
 Prevention
 The cause of primary brain tumors has not been
 determined, so there is no known way to prevent
 them.
 The best way to prevent secondary or meta
static brain tumors is to eliminate such risk
 factors as:
 poor nutrition and a low-fiber diet; since these con
tribute to development of intestinal cancers
 smoking, which causes lung cancer
 excessive use of alcohol, which is associated with
 liver cancer
 excessive exposure to the sun, which can cause mel
anoma (a deadly form of skin cancer).
 Monthly self-examinations of the breasts and tes
ticles can detect breast and testicular cancer at their
 earliest, most curable stages.