Definition
 Breast reconstruction is a series of surgical proce
dures performed to recreate a breast. Reconstructions
 are commonly done after one or both breasts are
 removed as a treatment for breast cancer. Also, a
 breast may need to be refashioned for other reasons,
 such as trauma or abnormalities that occur during
 breast development.
 Purpose
 Many authorities consider reconstruction an
 integral part of the therapy for breast cancer. A
 breast that appears natural offers a sense of whole
ness and normalcy, which can aid in the psychologi
cal recoveryfrombreastcancer.Iteliminatestheneed
 for an external prosthesis (false breast), which many
 women find physically uncomfortable as well as
 inconvenient.
 Precautions
 Not all women are good candidates for breast
 reconstruction. Overall poor physical health, or speci
fic problems such as cigarette smoking, obesity, high
 blood pressure, or diabetes, will increase the chance of
 complications. Also, a difficult and/or prolonged
 recovery period or failure of the reconstruction may
 be a result. A woman’s physical ability to cope with
 major surgery and recuperation also need to be
 considered.
 Description
 Breast reconstruction is done in two stages, with
 the ultimate goal of creating a breast which looks and
 feels as natural as possible. It is important to remem
ber that while a good result may mimic a normal
 breast closely, there will inevitably be scars and loss
 of sensation. The reconstructed breast cannot be
 exactly like the original.
 The first step is to form a structure called a breast
 mound. This can be accomplished using artificial
 materials called breast implants, or by using tissues
 from other parts of the woman’s body. The second step involves creating a balance between the newly
 constructedbreast and the breast on the opposite
 side. The nipple and areolar complex (darker area
 around the nipple)are recreated.This is usually done
 several months after the mound is created, to allow
 swelling to go down.Other procedures maybe neces
sary, suchas lifting the opposite breast (mastopexy),
 or making it larger or smaller to match the recon
structed breast.
 Timing, immediate or delayed reconstruction
 While immediate reconstruction(IR)is not recom
mended for women with breast cancer who need to
 undergo other, more important treatments, breast reconstruction can be done almost anytime. It even can
 be done during the same procedure as the mastectomy,
 or it can be delayed. There are psychological benefits to
 IR. The ability to return to normal activities and rou
tines is often enhanced when reconstruction follows
 immediately after mastectomy. A better appearance
 may result from IR. There is less skin removal, often
 resulting in a shorter scar. The surgeon is better able to
 preserve the normal boundaries of the breast, so it is
 easier to match the opposite breast more closely.
 The cost of IR is generally lower than the cost of
 delayed reconstruction (DR). There is one fewer opera
tion and hospital stay. Surgeon’s fees may be lower for
 a combined procedure than for two separate surgeries.
 TherearedisadvantagesofIRaswell.Thesurgery
 itself is longer, causing more time under anesthesia.
 Post-operative pain and recovery time will be greater
 than for mastectomy alone.
 Other authorities contend that delayed recon
struction (DR) offers different physical and psycholo
gical advantages. The initial mastectomy procedure
 alonetakes less time, andhasashorterrecoveryperiod
 and less pain than mastectomy and IR. The patient
 has more time to adjust to her diagnosis and recover
 from additional therapy. She is better able to research
 her options, and to formulate realistic goals for
 reconstruction. Some reconstructive surgery requires
 blood transfusions. With DR, the patient can donate
 her ownblood aheadoftime (autologous transfusion),
 and/or arrange to have family and friends donate
 blood for her use (directed donation).
 The psychological stress of living without a breast
 is a disadvantage of DR. The extra procedure DR
 entails results in higher costs. Although initial recov
ery is faster, an additional recuperation period is
 required after the delayed operation.
 Type of reconstruction
 There are two basic choices for breast reconstruc
tion. The breast tissue can be replaced with an implant
 or thebreast is created using someofthewoman’sown
 tissues (autologous reconstruction).
 ARTIFICIAL IMPLANTS. In general, implant proce
dures take less time, and are less expensive than auto
logous ones. Implants are breast shaped pouches.
 They are made of silicone outer shells, which may be
 smooth or textured. The inside may contain silicone
 gel, saline (salt water), or a combination of both.
 An implant may be a fixed volume type, which
 cannot change its size. Implants that have the capacity
 to be filled after insertion are called tissue expanders.
 These may be temporary or permanent.
 The initial procedure for any implant insertion
 uses the mastectomy incision to make a pocket of
 tissue, usually underneath the chest wall muscle. In
 DR, the mastectomy scar may be re opened and used
 for this purpose, or a more cosmetic incision may be
 made. The implant is inserted into the pocket, the skin
 is stretched as needed and stitched closed.
 If there is inadequate tissue to achieve the desired
 size, or a naturally sagging breast is desired, a tissue
 expander is used. It resembles a partially deflated
 balloon, with an attached valve or port through
 which saline can be injected. After the initial surgical
 incision is healed, the woman returns to the doctor’s
 office, on a weekly or bi-weekly basis, to have small
 amounts of saline injected. Injections can continue for
 about six to eight weeks, until the preferred size is
 obtained. In some cases it may be overfilled, and
 later partially deflated to allow for a more pliable,
 natural result. A temporary tissue expander will be
 removed after several months and replaced with a
 permanent implant.
 IR surgery using an implant takes approximately
 two to three hours, and usually requires up to a three
 day hospital stay. Implant insertion surgery, as part of
 DR, takes one to two hours and can sometimes be  done as an outpatient, or it or it may entail overnight
 hospitalization.
 AUTOLOGUS RECONSTRUCTION. Attached flap
 andfree flap aretwotypesofsurgerywhereawoman’s
 tissue is used in reconstruction. An attached flap uses
 skin, muscle, and fat, leaving blood vessels attached to
 their original source of blood. The flap is maneuvered
 to the reconstruction site, keeping its original blood
 supply for nourishment. This may also be known as a
 pedicle flap. The second kind of surgery is called a free
 flap. This also uses skin, muscle, and fat, but severs the
 bloodvessels, and attaches them toothervesselswhere
 the new breast is to be created. The surgeon uses a
 microscope to accomplish this delicate task of sewing
 blood vessels together. Sometimes the term microsur
gery is used to refer to free flap procedures. Either type
 of surgery may also be called a myocutaneous flap,
 referring to the skin and muscle used.
 The skin and muscle used in autologous recon
struction can come from one of several possible places
 on the body, including the abdomen (TRAM flap or
 ‘‘tummy tuck’’), the back (latissimus dorsi flap), or the
 buttocks (gluteus maximus free flap).
 Finishing the reconstruction
 Other procedures may be necessary to achieve the
 goal of symmetrical breasts. It may be necessary to
 maketheopposite breast larger (augmentation), smal
ler (reduction), or higher (mastopexy). These, or any
 other refinements should be completed before the
 creation of a nipple and areola. Tissue to form the
 new nipple may come from the reconstructed breast
 itself, the opposite breast, or a more distant donor site,
 such as the inner thigh or behind the ear. The nipple
 and areolar construction is usually an outpatient pro
cedure. Afinalstep, oftendoneinthedoctor’soffice, is
 tattooing the new nipple and areola, to match the
 color of the opposite nipple and areola as closely as
 possible.
 Insurance
 Insurance coverage for breast reconstruction var
ies widely. Some policies will allow procedures on the
 affected breast, but refuse to pay for alterations to the
 opposite breast. Other plans may cover the cost of an
 external prosthesis, or reconstructive surgery, but not
 both. As of January 1998, 25 states had different laws
 regarding required insurance coverage for post mas
tectomy reconstruction.
 Implants mayposeadditionalinsuranceconcerns.
 Some companies will withdraw coverage for women
 with implants, or add a disclaimer for future implant
related problems. Careful reading of insurance poli
cies, including checking on the need for pre-approval
 and/or a second opinion, is strongly recommended.
 Preparation
 Routinepreoperative preparations, such as taking
 nothing to eat or drink the night before surgery are
 needed for reconstructive procedures. Blood transfu
sions are often necessary for autologous reconstruc
tive surgeries. The patient may donate her own blood,
 and/or have family and friends donate several weeks
 before the surgery.
 Emotional preparation is also important. Breast
 reconstruction will not resolve a psychological problem
 the woman had before mastectomy, nor make an
 unstable relationship strong. An expectation of physi
cal perfection is unrealistic. A woman who cites any of
 these reasons for reconstruction shows that she has not
 been adequately informed or prepared. Complete
 understanding of the benefits and limitations of this
 surgery is necessary for a satisfactory result.
 Aftercare
 The length of the hospital stay, recovery period,
 andfrequencyofvisitstothe doctorafter surgery varies
 considerably with the different kinds of reconstruction.
 In general, autologous procedures require longer hos
pitalization and recoverytimethanimplantprocedures.
 Bandages and drainage tubes remain in place for at
 least a day for all surgeries. Microsurgical or free flaps
 are most closely monitored in the first day or two after
 surgery. Thecirculation tothebreastmaybecheckedas
 often as every hour. Complete breast reconstruction
 requires at least one additional surgery to create a
 nipple and areola. Scars may remain red and raised
 for a month or longer. The true, final appearance of
 the breasts will not be visible for at least one year.
 Risks
 Somewomenhavereportedvarioustypesofauto
immune related connective-tissue disorders, which
 they attribute to their implants–usually involving sili
cone gel implants. Lawsuits have been filed against the
 manufacturers of implants. Food and Drug
 Administration guidelines, issued in 1992, now limit
 their use to women who need to replace an existing
 silicone gel-filled implant, have had surgery for breast
 cancer, or have a medical condition which results in
 serious breast abnormality. In addition, patients must
 sign a consent form which details the potential risks of
 silicone gel-filled implants, and become enrolled in a  long range study. Saline filled implants are permitted
 for all uses, although manufacturers must collect data
 on possible risks.
 TheFDAissuedastatusreportonBreastImplant
 Safety in 1995, and revised it in March 1997. It noted
 that studies so far have not shown a serious increase
 in the risk of recognized autoimmune diseases in
 women with silicone gel-filled breast implants. It also
 addressed concerns about other complications and
 emphasized the need for further study of this issue.
 There are a number of risks common to any surgi
cal procedure such as bleeding, infection, anesthesia
 reaction, or unexpected scarring. Hematoma (accumu
lation of blood at the surgical site), or seroma (collec
tion of fluid at the surgical site) can delay healing if not
 drained. Any breast reconstruction also poses a risk of
 asymmetryand/ortheneedforunplannedsurgicalrevi
sion. Persistent pain is another potential complication
 possible with all types of breast reconstruction.
 Implants have some unique problems that may
 develop. A thick scar, also called a capsule, forms
 around the implant, as part of the body’s normal
 reaction to a foreign substance. Capsular contracture
 occurs when the scar becomes firm or hardened. This
 maycausepain and/or change the texture and appear
ance of the breast. Implants can rupture and leak,
 deflate, or become displaced. The chances of capsular
 contracture or rupture increase with the age of the
 implant. These complications can usually be remedied
 with outpatient surgery to loosen the capsule or
 remove and/or replace the implant as needed. There
 is some evidence that using implants with textured
 surfaces may decrease the incidence of these problems.
 An implant tends to remain firm indefinitely. It will
 not grow larger or smaller as the woman’s weight
 changes. Asymmetry can develop if a woman gains
 or loses a large amount of weight.
 The autologous procedures all carry a risk of flap
 failure–loss of blood supply to the tissue forming the
 new breast. If a large portion of the flap develops
 inadequate blood supply, another reconstructive tech
nique may be necessary. TRAM flap procedures can
 result in decreased muscle tone and weakness in the
 abdomen and/or abdominal hernia. Arm weakness
 may occur after latissimus dorsi flap surgery.
 Normal results
 Anormal result of breast reconstruction depends
 on the woman’s goals and expectations. It will not be
 the same as the breast it replaces. In general, it should
 be similar in size and shape to the opposite breast, but
 will have less sensation and be less mobile than a
 natural breast. A reconstruction using implants will
 usually be firmer and rounder than the other breast. It
 may feel cooler to touch, depending on the amount of
 tissue over it. Scars are unavoidable, but should be as
 unobtrusive as possible.
 Breast reconstruction surgery may be performed
 by inserting an artificial substance, or implant, to
 replace breast tissue. Autologous reconstruction, in
 which a woman’s own tissues are used, includes the
 latissimus dorsi flap, where skin and muscle taken
 from the back is rotated around to the breast area,
 and the TRAM flap, in which abdominal fat and
 muscle are tunneled under the skin to the breast area.