 Definition
 A breast biopsy is removal of breast tissue for
 examination by apathologist. This can be accomplished
 surgically, or by withdrawing tissue through a needle.
 Purpose
 A biopsy is recommended when a significant
 abnormality is found, either on physical examination
 and/or by an imaging test. Examples of abnormality
 can include a breast lump felt during physical self
 examination or tissue changes noticed from a mam
mogramtest.Beforeabiopsyisperformed,itis impor
tant to make sure that the threat of cancer cannot be
 disproved or ruled out by a simpler, less invasive
 examination. A lump may be obviously harmless
 when examined by ultrasound. If this is not decisive,
 the presence of cancer or a variety of benign breast
 conditions can be determined using a biopsy.
 Precautions
 The type of biopsy recommended should be con
sidered. This will depend on whether the area can be felt, how well it can be seen on mammogram or ultra
sound, and how suspicious it feels or appears.
 Specialized equipment is needed for different types of
 biopsy and availability may vary. Generally, needle
 biopsy is less invasive than surgical biopsy. It is appro
priate for most, but not all situations. However, some
 surgeons feel it is far less accurate.
 Description
 Surgical biopsy
 If an abnormality is not felt during a self exam
ination, there are signs that indicate the need for med
ical attention. These include:
 severe breast pain
 changes in the size of a breast or the nipple
 changes in the shape of both breast or nipple
 pitting, dumpling or redness of the breast skin
 nipple redness, irritation, or inversion
 changes in the pattern of veins visible on the surface
 of the breast
 some types of nipple discharge
 If the abnormality is not felt, a needle localization
 must be done before the actual surgery. After local
 anesthetic is administered, a fine wire is placed in the
 area of concern. Either x ray or ultrasound guidance is
 used. The patient is awake and usually sitting up.
 There are two types of breast biopsy considered
 here, excisional and incisional. Anexcisionalbiopsyisa
 surgical procedure, where the entire area of concern
 and some surrounding tissue is removed. It is usually
 done as an outpatient procedure, in a hospital or free
 standingsurgerycenter.Thepatientmaybeawake,and
 is sometimes given medication to make her drowsy.
 The area tobe operatedon is numbedwith local
 anesthetic. Infrequently, general anesthesia is used.
 Anexcisional biopsy itself usually takes under one
 hour. The total amount of time spent at the facility depends on the type of anesthesia used, whether a
 needle localization was done, and the extent of the
 surgery.
 If a mass is very large, an incisional biopsy may be
 performed. In this case only a portion of the area is
 removed and sent for analysis. The procedure is the
 same as an excisional biopsy in other respects.
 Needle biopsy
 A needle biopsy removes part of the suspicious
 area for examination. There are two types, aspiration
 biopsy (using a fine needle), and large core needle
 biopsy. Either of these may be called a percutaneous
 needle biopsy. Percutaneous refers to a procedure
 done through the skin.
 A fine needle aspiration biopsy uses a very thin
 needle to withdraw fluid and cells that can be studied.
 It can be done in a doctor’s office, clinic, or hospital.
 Local anesthetic may be used, but is sometimes with
held, as it may be more painful than the biopsy needle.
 Theareatoplacetheneedlemaybelocatedbytouch.
 No specialized equipment is needed. However, using
 ultrasound guidance enables the physician to feel and
 seethelesionatthesametime.Theactualwithdrawing
 of fluid andcells can bevisualizedasitoccurs.Thishelps
 ensure that the specimen is taken from the right place.
 Alarge core needle biopsy uses a larger diameter
 needle to remove small pieces of tissue, about the size
 of a grain of rice. It can be done in a clinic or hospital
 that has the appropriate facilities. Local anesthetic is
 routinely used. Ultrasound or x ray is used for gui
dance of a large core needle biopsy.
 If the suspicious area is seen best with x ray, a
 stereotactic device is used. This means that x rays are
 taken from several angles. This information is fed into
 a computer, which analyzes the data and guides the
 needle to the correct place. The patient may be sitting
 up, orshemaybelyingonherstomach,withherbreast
 positioned through an opening in the table. The breast
 is held firmly, but comfortably between a plastic pad
dle and a metal plate, similar to those used for mam
mograms (a set of x rays taken of the front and side of
 the breast). X rays may be taken before, during, and
 after the tissue is drawn into the needle, to confirm
 that the correct spot is biopsied. This procedure may
 also be referred to as a stereotactic core biopsy, or a
 mammotomy.
 Ultrasound is used to guide needle placement for
 somelesions.Thepatientlies onherbackorside.After
 the area is numbed,sterile gel is applied. The physician
 places a transducer, an instrument about the size of an
 electric shaver, over the skin. This produces an image
 from the reflection of sound waves. A special needle,
 usually in a spring loaded device, is used to obtain the
 tissue. The procedure is observed on a monitor as it is
 happening.
 Preparation
 A surgical breast biopsy may require the patient to
 have nothing to eat or drink for a period of time before the operation. This will typically be from midnight the
 night before, if general anesthesia is planned. No food
 restrictions are necessary for needle biopsy. It is advi
sable to eat lightly before the procedure. This is espe
cially important if the patient will be lying on her
 stomach for a stereotactic biopsy.
 Aftercare
 After a surgical biopsy, the incision will be closed
 with stitches, and covered with a bandage. The bandage
 canusuallyberemovedinoneor twodays.Stitches
 are taken out approximately one week afterward.
 Depending ontheextent of the operation, normal activ
ities can be resumed in approximately one to three days.
 Vigorous exercise maybelimited for one to three weeks.
 The skin opening for a needle biopsy is minimal.
 It maybeclosedwiththin,cleartape,calledasteristrip,
 or covered with a bandaid and a small gauze bandage.
 Thepatientcanreturntoherusualroutineimmediately
 after the biopsy. Strenuous activity or heavy lifting is
 not recommended for 24 hours. Any bandages can be
 removed one or two days after the biopsy.
 Risks
 Infection is always a possibility when the skin is
 broken, althoughthisrarely occurs. Redness, swelling,
 or severe pain at the biopsy site would indicate a
 possible infection. Another possible consequence of a
 breast biopsy is a hematoma. This is a collection of
 blood at the biopsy site. It is usually absorbed natu
rally by the body. If it is very large and uncomfortable,
 it may need to be drained. A surgical breast biopsy
 may produce a visible scar on the breast. Sometimes
 this may make future mammograms harder to inter
pret accurately.
 Afalse negative pathology report is another risk.
 This means that no cancer was found when a cancer
 was present. The incidence of this varies with the
 biopsy technique. In general, fine needle aspiration
 biopsies have the highest rate of false negative results,
 but there may bevariation in results between facilities.
 Normal results
 A normal pathology report indicates no malig
nancy is present. The tissue sample may be further
 classified as a benign breast condition, such as tumor
 of the breast (fibroadenoma) or connective tissue that
 resembles fiber (fibrosis). Studies have demonstrated
 that approximately 80% of all breast biopsies result in
 a benign pathology report.
 Anabnormal pathology report indicates a cancer
 is present. If a fine needle aspiration biopsy was per
formed, the pathologist has viewed individual cells
 under a microscope to see if they appear cancerous.
 Large core needle biopsy and surgical biopsy will be
 able to give more information. This includes the type
 of cancer, whether it has invaded surrounding tissue,
 and how likely it is to spread quickly. There are some
 conditions which are not malignant but indicate high
 risk for future development of breast cancer. If these
 are identified, more frequent monitoring of the area
 may be recommended.