 Definition
 Bronchiolitis is an acute viral infection of the
 small air passages of the lungs called the bronchioles.
  Description
 Bronchiolitis is extremely common. It occurs
 most often in children between the ages of two and
 24 months, with peak infection occurring between
 three and six months of age. About 25% of infants
 have bronchiolitis during their first year, and 95%
 have had the disease by their second birthday. In
 temperate climates, bronchiolitis peaks from winter
 to late spring. In subtropical climates, the disease
 peaks from October to February.
 Children who attend daycare or who live in
 crowded conditions and those who are exposed to
 second-hand smoke at home are morelikely todevelop
 bronchiolitis. Premature infants and children born with
 heart and lung defects or HIV/AIDS are more likely to
 have severe, life-threatening infections. Bronchiolitis
 occurs more often in boys than girls, with boys being
 hospitalized at 1.5 times the rate of girls. Bronchiolitis
 is a significant cause of respiratory disease worldwide.
 The World Health Organization (WHO) has funded
 research to develop a vaccine against the disease, but
 thus attempts have been unsuccessful.
 Causes and symptoms
 Bronchiolitis is caused by several different viruses.
 The most common of these is respiratory syncytial
 virus (RVS), which is responsible for about 100,000
 hospitalizations of children under age four each year.
 Two subtypes of RSV have been identified, one of
 which causes most of the severe bronchiolitis infec
tions. In addition, bronchiolitis can be caused by influ
enza, parainfluenza, and adenoviruses, all of which are
 common from fall through spring. These viruses are
 spread in tiny drops of fluid from an infected person’s
 nose and mouth through direct contact, such as shak
ing hands, or kissing. The viruses can also live several
 hours on countertops, toys, or used tissues and easily
 infect people who handle contaminated items. The
 time from infection to the appearance of symptoms
 varies from two to seven days.
 Bronchiolitis affects individuals differently
 depending on their age. In adults, older children, and  some infants, bronchiolitis viruses causes symptoms
 similar to a mild cold—runny nose, stuffy head, and
 mild cough. The lungs are not involved, and these
 symptoms clear up without any medical treatment. In
 some children under age two, the cold-like upper
 respiratory symptoms worsen after a day or two. The
 lung tissue begins to swell and produce mucus, and
 the cells lining the bronchioles begin to slough off
 into the air passages. As the airways narrow from
 swelling, and mucus accumulation, breathing becomes
 difficult, and the child makes a wheezing or whistling
 sound with each breath. Lung involvement can occur
 quite rapidly.
 The most common signs of bronchiolitis involve
 the infant’s struggle to breathe. The child may take
 50–60 breaths per minute and may develop brief per
iods when they stop breathing (apnea) and begin to
 turn blue (cyanosis). This occurs most often in babies
 who were born very prematurely or who are under six
 weeksofageandbabieswithcongenitalheartandlung
 problems and compromised immune systems. Babies
 may also stop eating, because it is becomes difficult
 for them to swallow and breathe at the same time.
 They may have a low fever, cough, and vomiting.
 Diagnosis
 Bronchiolitis is usually diagnosed through a phy
sical examination by a pediatrician or family physi
cian. The physician often finds an increased heart
 rate, rapid, labored breathing, and crackles in the
 lungs when the child inhales. Signs of ear infection
 (otitis media) and throat infection (pharyngitis) are
 sometimes present.
 Although laboratory tests are available that can
 within in a few hours confirm the presence of RSV,
 these tests are not routinely necessary. The oxygen
 level in the blood may be measured through pulse
 oximetry in babies who are having difficulty breathing.
 Inadequate oxygen in the blood is an indication that
 hospitalization is necessary. Chest x-rays may be done
 on severely ill children to rule out other conditions.
 Treatment
 The degree of respiratory distress determines
 treatment. Individuals with mild symptomsaretreated
 as if they have a cold with rest, fluids, and a cool
 air humidifier. Babies who are struggling to breath
 may hospitalized and given supplemental humidified
 oxygen. Their breathing will be monitored and if
 necessary fluids will be given intravenously to prevent
 dehydration. Occasionally infants need mechanical
 ventilation to fill and empty the lungs until the airways
 open.
 Those children with compromised immune sys
tems from diseases such as congenital HIV/AIDS
 and transplant patients are at highest risk for severe
 infections, serious complications, and death. Children
 with congenital heart and lung disorders are also at
 higher risk, as are infants under six weeks old. These
 high risk children may be admitted to pediatric inten
sive care units and treated with ribvarin (Virazole), a
 drug that keeps the virus from reproducing. This drug
 is reserved for the most critical cases.
 Alternative treatment
 Although there are alternative treatments for
 cold symptoms, such as echinacea and zinc, parents
 should consult their health practitioner about the
 appropriateness of using these treatments in very
 young children.
 Prognosis
 The majority of children who get bronchiolitis,
 even severe infections, recover without complications
 in one to two weeks, although fatigue and a light
 cough may linger longer. About 60% of people
 develop only cold-like symptoms without lung invol
vement. However, the disease accounts for about
 100,000 pediatric hospitalizations and 4,500 deaths
 each year. Deaths usually occur because medical care
 is not sought soon enough.
 Although many viral illnesses, like chicken pox,
 can be contracted only once, after which individuals
 develop immunity, people can get bronchiolitis multi
ple times. However, after the first infection, the symp
toms are usually mild.
 Prevention
 The viruses that cause bronchiolitis spread very
 easily, making prevention difficult. Common sense
 measures such as frequent hand washing and keeping
 children away from crowds and sick individuals are
 only partially effective. Certain very high risk babies
 can be treated during the peak virus season with
 monthly injections of antiviral immunoglobulins to
 protect against RSV infection. These injections cost
 several thousand dollars per child per season and are
 reserved for children whose life could be at risk if they
 became infected. Antiviral immunoglobulins are used
 onlyforpreventionandarenoteffectiveasatreatment
 once the infection has been acquired.