Definition
 Bronchiectasis is a condition in which an area of
 the bronchial tubes is permanently and abnormally
 widened (dilated), with accompanying infection.
 Description
 Thebronchial tubes are the networks of branching
 tubes which deliver air to the tiny sacs of the lungs
 (alveoli). In bronchiectasis, the diameter of the bronchi
 is unusually large. Examination of the walls of the  bronchial tubes reveals destruction of the normal struc
tural elements, with replacement by scar tissue. Pus
 collects within the bronchi, and the normal flow of
 oxygen into the lungs, and carbon dioxide out of the
 lungs (air exchange) is impaired. The bronchi show
 signs of inflammation, with swelling and invasion by a
 variety of immune cells. The inflamed areas show signs
 of increased growth of blood vessels. The area of the
 lung which should be served by a diseased bronchial
 tube is also prone to inflammation and infection.
 Causes and symptoms
 Prior to the widespread use of immunizations,
 bronchiectasis was often the result of a serious infec
tion with either measles or whooping cough. Currently,
 viruses that cause influenza (flu) or influenza-like
 syndromes, as well as a number of bacteria may pre
cede the development of bronchiectasis. Patients who
 have been infected with tuberculosis or the virus which
 causes AIDS (HIV or human immunodeficiency virus)
 also have an increased chance of bronchiectasis.
 Anumberofpre-existing conditions may cause an
 individual to be moresusceptible thannormal toinfec
tion, with increased risk of bronchiectasis developing.
 These conditions include disorders of cilia, and
 immune disorders.
 Cilia are the tiny hairs which usually line the
 bronchial tubes. Cilia wave constantly, sweeping the
 bronchial tubes clean of bacterial or viral invaders,
 and cleaning away excess secretions (mucus, sputum)
 which may be produced by the bronchi. When these
 cilia are abnormal or absent at birth, various bacterial
 or viral invaders may remain in the respiratory tract,
 multiply, and cause serious infections. 
  Immune disorders include decreased production
 of certain immune chemicals (immunoglobulins)
 which usually serve to fight off infection by bacterial
 or viral invasion. When these immunoglobulins are
 not produced in large enough quantity, bacterial
 and viral invaders are not effectively killed off, and
 infection occurs.
 Other causes of bronchiectasis include an abnor
mally blocked (obstructed) airway. This can be due to
 tumor growth within the bronchial tube, or due to a
 child accidentally inhaling a small object which then
 blocks off the bronchial tube. People with the disease
 called cystic fibrosis (CF) often have their bronchial
 tubes obstructed by the thick, sticky mucus which is a
 hallmark of CF. Toxic exposures (breathing ammo
nia, for example) can harm the bronchi, and lead to
 bronchiectasis. An extreme allergic response of the
 immune system to the presence of certain fungi (espe
cially one called Aspergillus) can also damage the
 bronchial tubes enough to result in bronchiectasis.
 Symptoms of bronchiectasis include constant
 cough and the production of infected sputum (sputum
 is a mixture of mucus and pus), which may be bloody.
 In some cases, there may be wheezing and shortness of
 breath. The constant, low-level of infection may flare,
 resulting in increased production of sputum, worsen
ing of the cough, andfever. The area ofthelungserved
 by the affected bronchial tube may become severely
 infected, resulting in pneumonia.
 Diagnosis
 Chest x raymayreveal evidence of bronchiectasis,
 and CT scans are particularly good at revealing the
 thick, dilated bronchial walls of bronchiectasis.
 Sputum will need to be collected and cultured (grown
 in a laboratory dish), in order to examine it micro
scopically for the specific type of organism responsible
 for infection. A careful search for other underlying
 diseases is important, looking in particular for ciliary  abnormalities, cystic fibrosis, or immunoglobulin
 deficiencies.
 Treatment
 Treatment should involve efforts to resolve any
 underlying disorder. Infections will require antibiotics,
 obstruction may require the removal of a foreign
 object or tumor. Medications are available to help
 thin the sputum, so that it can be more effectively
 coughed up. Rhythmic clapping on the chest and
 back, while the patient assumes a number of positions
 (head down, primarily), may help the lungs to drain
 more effectively. This is called chest physical therapy,
 or percussion and postural drainage.
 When a particular area of the lung is constantly
 and severely infected, surgery may be needed to
 remove it. When bleeding occurs from irritated bron
chial tubes and overgrown bronchial blood vessels,
 surgery may be required either to remove an area of
 the bronchial tube, or to inject the bleeding blood
 vessel with a material to stop the bleeding.
 In some patients, bronchiectasis eventually leads
 to a constantly low level of blood oxygen, despite
 other treatments. These patients usually have an asso
ciated increase in the size of the right side of their
 hearts, along with a decrease in the heart’s ability to
 pump blood through the lungs. Some patients with
 extremely severe symptoms and disability have been
 treated with lung transplantation.
 Prognosis
 Prognosis varies widely, depending on how wide
spread or focal the bronchiectasis, and the presence of
 other underlying disorders.