 Definition
 Brucellosis is a bacterial disease caused by mem
bers of the Brucella genus that can infect humans but
 primarily infects livestock. Symptoms of the disease
 include intermittent fever, sweating, chills, aches, and
 mental depression. The disease can become chronic
 and recur, particularly if untreated.
 Description
 Also known as undulant fever, Malta fever,
 Gibraltar fever, Bang’s disease, or Mediterranean
 fever, brucellosis is most likely to occur among those
 individuals who regularly work with livestock. The
 disease originated in domestic livestock but was
 passed on to wild animal species, including the elk
 and buffalo of the western United States. In humans,
 brucellosis continues to be spread via unpasteurized
 milk obtained from infected cows or through contact
 with the discharges of cattle and goats during
 miscarriage. In areas of the world where milk is not
 pasteurized, for example in Latin America and the
 Mediterranean, thediseaseis still contracted by ingest
ing unpasteurized dairy products. However, in the
 United States, the widespread pasteurization of milk
 and nearly complete eradication of the infection from
 cattle has reduced the number of human cases from
 6,500 in 1940 to about 70 in 1994.
 Causes and symptoms
 The disease is caused by several different species
 of parasitic bacteria of the genus Brucella. B. abortus is
 found in cattle and can cause cows to abort their  fetuses. B. suis is most often found in hogs and is
 more deadly when contracted by humans than the
 organism found in cattle. B. melitensis is found in
 goats and sheep and causes the most severe illness in
 humans. B. rangiferi infects reindeer and caribou, and
 B. canis is found in dogs.
 A human contracts the disease by coming into
 contact with an infected animal and either allowing
 the bacteria to enter a cut, breathing in the bacteria, or
 by consuming unpasteurized milk or fresh goat cheese
 obtained from a contaminated animal. In the United
 States, the disease is primarily confined to slaughter
house workers.
 Scientists do not agree about whether brucello
sis can be transmitted from one person to another,
 although some people have been infected from a
 tainted blood transfusion or bone marrow trans
plant. Newborn babies have also contracted the ill
ness from their mothers during birth. Currently, it is
 believed that brucellosis can also be transmitted
 sexually.
 The disease is not usually fatal, but the intermit
tent fevers (a source of its nickname, ‘‘undulant
 fever’’) can be exhausting. Symptoms usually appear
 between five days and a month after exposure and
 begin with a single bout of high fever accompanied
 by shivering, aching, and drenching sweats that last
 for afewdays.Othersymptomsmayincludeheadache,
 poor appetite, backache, weakness, and depression.
 Mental depression can be so severe that the patient
 may become suicidal.
 In rare, untreated cases, the disease can become so
 severe that it leads to fatal complications, such as
 pneumonia or bacterial meningitis. B. melitensis can
 cause miscarriages, especially during the first three
 months of pregnancy. The condition can also occur in a chronic form, in which symptoms recur over a
 period of months or years.
 Diagnosis
 Brucellosis is usually diagnosed by detecting one
 or more Brucella species in blood or urine samples.
 The bacteria may be positively identified using bio
chemical methods or using a technique whereby, if
 present in the sample, the brucellosis bacteria are
 made to fluoresce. Brucellosis may also be diagnosed
 by culturing and isolating the bacteria from one of the
 above samples. Blood samples will also indicate ele
vated antibody levels or increased amounts of a pro
tein produced directly in response to infection with
 brucellosis bacteria.
 Treatment
 Prolonged treatment with antibiotics, including
 tetracyclines (with streptomycin), co-trimoxazole,
 and sulfonamides, is effective. Bed rest is also impera
tive. In the chronic form of brucellosis, the symptoms
 may recur, requiring a second course of treatment.
 Prognosis
 Early diagnosis and prompt treatment is essential
 to prevent chronic infection. Untreated, the disease
 may linger for years, but it is rarely fatal. Relapses
 may also occur.
 Prevention
 There is no human vaccine for brucellosis, but
 humans can be protected by controlling the disease in
 livestock. After checking to make sure an animal is not
 already infected, and destroying those that are, all live
stock should be immunized. Butchers and those who
 work in slaughterhouses should wear protective glasses
 and clothing, and protect broken skin from infection.
 Someexpertssuggest thatapersonwiththedisease
 refrain from engaging in unprotected sex until free of
 the disease. The sexual partners of an infected person
 should also be closely monitored for signs of infection.