 Definition
 Bruises, or ecchymoses, are a discoloration and
 tenderness of the skin or mucous membranes due
 to the leakage of blood from an injured blood vessel
 into the tissues. Pupura refers to bruising as the result of
 a disease condition. A very small bruise is called
 a petechia. These often appear as many tiny red dots
 clustered together, and could indicate aserious problem.
 Description
 Bruiseschangecolorsover time inapredictable
 pattern, so that it is possible to estimate when an injury
 occurred by the color of the bruise. Initially, a bruise
 will be reddish, the color of the blood under the skin.
 After onetotwodays,theredbloodcellsbegintobreak
 down, and the bruise will darken to a blue or purplish
 color. This fades to green at about day six. Around the
 eighth or ninth day, the skin over the bruised area
 will have a brown or yellowish appearance, and it will
 gradually diminish back to its normal color.
 Longperiods of standing will cause the blood that
 collects in a bruise to seep through the tissues. Bruises
 are actually made of little pools of blood, so the blood
 in one place may flow downhill after awhile and
 appear in another. For instance, bruising in the back
 of the abdomen may eventually appear in the groin;
 bruising in the thigh or the knee will work its way
 down to the ankle.
 Causes and symptoms
 Healthy people may develop bruises from any
 injury that doesn’t break through the skin. Vigorous
 exercise may also cause bruises due to bringing about
 small tears in blood vessels walls. In a condition
 known as purpura simplex, there is a tendency to
 bruise easily due to an increased fragility of the
 bloodvessels. Bruises also develop easilyin the elderly,
 because the skin and blood vessels have a tendency to
 become thinner and more fragile with aging, and there
 is an increased use of medications that interfere with  the blood clotting system. In the condition known as
 purpura senilis, the elderly develop bruises from mini
mal contact that may take up to several months to
 completely heal.
 The use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories such
 as ibuprofen (Advil) and naproxen (Aleve) may lead to
 increasedbruising.Aspirin,antidepressants,asthmamed
ications, and cortisone medications also have this effect.
 The anti-clotting medications also known as blood
 thinners, especially the drug Warfarin (Coumadin),
 maybethecauseofparticularly severe bruising.
 Sometimesbruisesareconnectedwithmoreserious
 illnesses. There are a number of diseases that cause
 excessive bleeding or bleeding from injuries too slight
 to have consequences in healthy people. An abnormal
 tendency to bleed may be due to hereditary bleeding
 disorders, certain prescription medications, diseases of
 the blood such as leukemia, and diseases that increase
 the fragility of blood vessels. If there are large areas of
 bruising or bruises develop very easily, this may herald
 a problem. Other causes that should be ruled out
 include liver disease, alcoholism, drugaddiction, and
 acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS).
 Bruising that occurs around the navel may indicate
 dangerous internal bleeding; bruising behind the ear,
 called Battle’s sign, may be due to a skull fracture; and
 raised bruises may point to autoimmune disease.
 Diagnosis
 Bruising is usually a minor problem, which does
 not require a medical diagnosis. However, faced with
 extensive bruising, bruising with no apparent cause, or
 bruising in certain locations, a physician will pursue an  evaluation that will include a number of blood tests. If
 the area of the bruise becomes hard, an x ray may be
 required.
 Treatment
 Abruise by itself needs no medical treatment. It is
 often recommendedthaticepacksbeappliedonandoff
 duringthefirst24hoursofinjurytoreducethebruising.
 After that, heat, especially moist heat, is recommended
 to increase the circulation and the healing ofthe injured
 tissues. Rest, elevation of the effected part, and com
pression with a bandage will also retard the accumula
tionofblood.Rarely,ifabruiseissolargethatthebody
 cannot completely absorb it or if the site becomes
 infected, it may have to be surgically removed.
  Alternative treatment
 Several types of topical applications are usually
 recommend to speed healing and to reduce the pain
 associated with bruises. Vitamin K cream can be
 applied directly to the site of injury. Astringent herbs
 such as witch hazel, Hamamelis virginiana,canbeused.
 This will tighten the tissues and therefore diminish the
 bruising. The homeopathic remedy, Arnica montana,
 can be applied as a cream or gel to unbroken skin.
 Oral homeopathic remedies may reduce bruising,
 pain, and swelling as well. Arnica montana,at30ml
 (1 oz), taken one to two times per day is highly recom
mended. For ledum, 30 ml (1 oz) one to two times per
 day is also useful.
 Prognosis
 The blood under the skin which causes the disco
loration of bruising should be totally reabsorbed by
 the body in three weeks or less. At that time, the skin
 color should completely return to normal.
 Sometimes, a bruise may become solid and
 increase in size instead of dissolving. This may indi
cate blood trapped in the tissues, which may be need
 to be drained. This is referred to as a hematoma.
 Less commonly, the body may develop calcium
 deposits at the injury site in a process called hetero
topic ossification.
 Prevention
 Vitamin K promotes normal clotting in the
 blood, and therefore may help reduce the tendency
 to bruise easily. Green leafy vegetables, alfalfa, broc
coli, seaweed, and fish liver oils are dietary sources of
 vitamin K. Other good foods to eat would be those  containing bioflavonoids, such as reddish-blue ber
ries. These can assist in strengthening the connective
 tissue, which will decrease the spread of blood and
 bruising. Zinc and vitamin C supplements are also
 recommended for this.