 Definition
 Buerger’sdiseaseis aninflammationofthearteries,
 veins, and nerves in the legs, principally, leading to
 restricted blood flow. Left untreated, Buerger’s disease
 can lead to gangrene of the affected areas. Buerger’s
 disease is also known as thromboangitis obliterans.
 Causes and symptoms
 Theexact causeof Buerger’s disease is not known.
 It is seen most often in young to middle-aged men
 (ages 20-40) who are heavy smokers of cigarettes.
 Cases of this disease in non-smokers are very rare,
 hence, cigarette smoking is considered a causative fac
tor. Approximately 40% of the patients have a history
 of inflammationofavein(phlebitis), which mayplaya
 role in the development of Buerger’s disease. The dis
ease is mainly seen in the legs of affected persons, but
 may also appear in their arms. Early symptoms
 include decrease in the blood supply (arterial ischemia)
 and superficial (near the skin surface) phlebitis. The
 main symptom is pain in the affected areas. Onset of
 the disease is gradual and first occurs in the feet or
 hands. Inflammation occurs in small and medium
sized arteries and veins near the surface of the limb.
 In advanced cases, blood vessels in other parts of the
 body may be affected. There is a progressive decrease
 in the blood flow to the affected areas. The pulse in
 arteries of the feet is weak or undetectable. The lack of
 blood flow can lead to gangrene, which is decay of
 tissue due to restricted blood supply. A cold sensitivity
 in the hands, similar to that seen in Raynaud’s disease,
 can develop. In this case, the hands turn color–white,
 blue, and then red–when exposed to the cold.
 Diagnosis
 Diagnosis is usually made from the clinical symp
toms. Patients frequently complain of numbness, tin
gling, or burning sensations in the affected area before
 evidence of vascular inflammation becomes apparent. 
  Treatment
 There is noeffective medication or surgery for this
 disease. Patients must stop smoking to halt further
 development of the symptoms. Vasodilators, drugs
 that increase the diameter of the blood vessels, can
 be administered, but may not be effective. Exposure
 of affected areas to heat or cold should be avoided.
 Trauma to the feet and other affected areas should be
 avoided and infections must be treated promptly.
 Prognosis
 The disease is progressive in patients who do not
 stop smoking. Areas with gangrene must be removed
 surgically.
 Prevention
 Smoking is the only known causative agent for
 this disease and should be avoided.