 Definition
 Abunion is an abnormal enlargement of the joint
 (the first metatarsophalangeal joint, or MTPJ) at the
 base of the great or big toe (hallux). It is caused  by inflammation and usually results from chronic irri
tation and pressure from poorly fitting footwear.
 Description
 A displacement of two major bones of the foot
 (hallux valgus) causes bunions, although not everyone
 with this displacement will develop the joint swelling
 and bone overgrowth that characterize a bunion. One
 of the bones involved is called the first metatarsal
 bone. This bone is long and slender, with the big toe
 attached on one end and the other end connected to
 foot bones closer to the ankle. This foot bone is dis
placed in the direction of the four other metatarsals
 connected withthetoes. Theotherboneinvolvedisthe
 big toe itself, which is displaced toward the smaller
 toes. As the big toe continues to move toward the
 smaller toes, it may become displaced under or over
 the second toe. The displacement of these two foot
 bonescausesaprojection ofboneontheinsideportion
 of the forefoot. The skin over this projection often
 becomes inflamed from rubbing against the shoe,
 and a callus may form.
 The joint contains a small sac (bursa) filled with
 fluid that cushions the bones and helps the joint to
 move smoothly. When a bunion forms, this sac
 becomes inflamed and thickened. The swelling in the
 joint causes additional pain and pressure in the toe.
 Causes and symptoms
 Bunions mayformasaresultofabnormal motion
 of the foot during walking or running. One common
 example of an abnormal movement is an excessive
 amount of stress placed upon the inside of the foot.
 This leads to friction and irritation of the involved  structures. Age has also been noted as a factor in
 developing bunions, in part because the underlying
 bonedisplacement worsens over timeunless corrective
 measures are taken.
 Wearing improperly fitting shoes, especially those
 with a narrow toe box and excessive heel height, often
 causes the formation of a bunion. This forefoot defor
mity is seen more often in women than men. The
 higher frequency in females may be related to the
 strong link between footwear fashion and bunions.
 In fact, in a recent survey of more than 350 women,
 nearly 90% wore shoes that were at least one size too
 small or too narrow.
 Because genetic factors can predispose people to
 the hallux valgus bone displacement, a strong family
 history of bunions can increase the likelihood of devel
oping this foot disorder. Various arthritic conditions
 and several genetic and neuromuscular diseases, such
 as Down syndrome and Marfan syndrome, cause
 muscle imbalances that can create bunions from
 displacement of the first metatarsal and big toe.
 Other possible causes of bunions are leg-length discre
pancies, with the bunion present on the longer leg, and
 trauma occurring to the joint of the big toe.
 Symptoms of bunions include the common signs
 of inflammation such as redness, swelling, and pain.
 The discomfort is primarily located along the inside of
 the foot just behind the big toe. Because of friction, a
 callus may develop over the bunion. If an overlapping
 of the toes is allowed, additional rubbing and pain
 occurs. Inflammation of this area causes a decrease
 in motion with associated discomfort in the joint
 between the big toe and the first metatarsal. If allowed
 to worsen, the skin over the bunion may break down
 causing an ulcer, which also presents a problem of
 potential infection. (Foot ulcers can be particularly
 dangerous for people with diabetes, who may have
 trouble feeling the ulcer forming and healing if it
 becomes infected.) 
  Diagnosis
 A thorough medical history and physical exam
 by aphysician is always necessary for the proper diag
nosis of bunions and other foot conditions. X rays
 can help confirm the diagnosis by showing the bone
 displacement, joint swelling, and, in some cases, the
 overgrowth of bone that characterizes bunions.
 Doctors will also consider the possibility that the
 joint pain is caused by or complicated by arthritis
 (which causes destruction of the cartilage of the
 joint), gout (which causes the accumulation of uric
 acid crystals in the joint), tiny fractures of a bone in
 the foot (stress fractures), or infection and may order
 additional tests to rule out these possibilities.
 Treatment
 Conservative
 The first step in treating a bunion is to remove
 as much pressure from the area as possible. People
 with bunions should wear shoes that have enough
 room in the toe box to accommodate the bunion
 and avoid high-heeled shoes and tight-fitting socks
 or stockings. Dressings and pads help protect the
 bunion from additional shoe pressure. The applica
tion of splints or customized shoe inserts (orthotics)
 to correct thealignmentofthebigtoejointiseffective
 for many bunions. Most patients are instructed to
 rest or choose exercises that put less stress on their
 feet, at least until the misalignment is corrected.
 In some cases, physicians also use steroid injections
 with local anesthetic around the bunion to reduce
 inflammation.
 Surgery
 If conservative treatment is not successful, surgi
cal removal of the bunion may be necessary to correct
 the deformity. This procedure is called a bunionect
omy, and there are many variations on the operation,
 which is usually performed by a surgeon who specia
lizes in treating bone conditions (orthopedics) or by
 one who specializes in treating the foot (podiatry).
 Surgeons consider the angle of the bone misalignment,
 the condition of the bursa, and the strength of the
 bones when they choose which procedure to use.
 Most bunionectomies involve the removal of a section
 of bone and the insertion of pins to rejoin the bone.
 Sometimes the surgeons may move ligaments (which
 connect bone to bone in the joint) or tendons (which
 connect bone to muscle) in order to realign the bones.
 After this procedure, the bones and other tissues are
 held in place while they heal by compression dressings
 or a short cast. The individual must refrain from vig
orous exercise for six weeks.
 Alternative treatment
 Deep friction massage techniques by a physical or
 massage therapist can be helpful to increase circula
tion, reduce inflammation, and prevent soft tissue
 build up. Physical therapy also provides useful
 approaches such as ultrasound to help retard or
 reverse the formation of the bunion. Various taping
 techniques can be useful to realign the toe anddecrease
 friction and rubbing that may be present. The homeo
pathic tissue salt Calcarea phosphorica can be useful
 in balancing the bone formation/remodeling.
 Prognosis
 Often modifications in footwear allow a good
 prognosis without surgery. If surgery is necessary,
 complete healing without complications requires
 approximately four to six weeks. Even after surgery
 corrects the bone misalignment, patients are usually
 instructed to continue wearing low-heeled, roomy
 shoes to prevent the bunion from reforming.
 Prevention
 Prevention begins with proper foot wear. Shoes
 with a wide and deep toe box are best. High-heeled
 shoes should not be worn for long periods of time. If a
 bunion is present and becomes inflamed, the foot
 should be elevated with the application of an ice
 pack over the painful area for not more than 20
 minutes every other hour. If pain and swelling con
tinue, a podiatrist or physician should be contacted.