Definition
 Burns are injuries to tissues caused by heat, fric
tion, electricity, radiation, or chemicals.
 Description
 Burns are characterized by degree, based on the
 severity of the tissue damage. A first-degree burn
 causes redness and swelling in the outermost layers
 of skin (epidermis). A second-degree burn involves
 redness, swelling and blistering, and the damage may
 extend beneath the epidermis to deeper layers of skin
 (dermis). A third-degree burn, also called a full-thick
ness burn, destroys the entire depth of skin, causing
 significant scarring. Damage also may extend to the
 underlying fat, muscle, or bone.
 The severity of the burn is also judged by the
 amount of body surface area (BSA) involved. Health
 care workers use the ‘‘rule of nines’’ to determine the
 percentage of BSA affected in patients more than
 9 years old: each arm with its hand is 9% of BSA;
 each leg with its foot is 18%; the front of the torso is
 18%; the back of the torso, including the buttocks, is
 18%; the head and neck are 9%; and the genital area
 (perineum) is 1%. This rule cannot be applied to a
 young child’s body proportions, so BSA is estimated
 using the palm of the patient’s hand as a measure of
 1%area.
 The severity of the burn will determine not only
 the type of treatment, but also where the burn patient
 should receive treatment. Minor burns may be treated
 at home or in a doctor’s office. These are defined as
 first- or second-degree burns covering less than 15%
 of an adult’s body or less than 10% of a child’s body,
 orathird-degreeburnonlessthan2%BSA.Moderate
 burns should be treated at a hospital. These are
 defined as first- or second-degree burns covering
 15%-25%ofanadult’s body or 10%-20% ofa child’s
 body, or a third-degree burn on 2%-10% BSA.
 Critical, or major, burns are the most serious and
 should be treated in a specialized burn unit of a hospi
tal. These are defined as first- or second-degree burns
 covering more than 25% of an adult’s body or more
 than 20% of a child’s body, or a third-degree burn on
 more than 10% BSA. In addition, burns involving
 the hands, feet, face, eyes, ears, or genitals are consid
ered critical. Other factors influence the level of treat
ment needed, including associated injuries such as
 bone fractures and smoke inhalation, presence of a
 chronic disease, or a history of being abused. Also,
 children and the elderly are more vulnerable to com
plications from burn injuries and require more inten
sive care.
 Causes and symptoms
 Burns may be caused by even a brief encounter
 with heat greater than 120F (49C). The source of
 this heat may be the sun (causing a sunburn), hot
 liquids, steam, fire, electricity, friction (causing rug
 burns and rope burns), and chemicals (causing a caus
tic burn upon contact).
 Signs of aburnarelocalized redness,swelling, and
 pain. A severe burn will also blister. The skin may also
 peel, appear white or charred, and feel numb. A burn
 may trigger a headache and fever. Extensive burns
 may induce shock, the symptoms of which are faint
ness, weakness, rapid pulse and breathing, pale and
 clammy skin, and bluish lips and fingernails.
 Diagnosis
 Aphysician will diagnose a burn based upon visual
 examination, and will also ask the patient or family
 members questions to determine the best treatment. He
 or she mayalsocheckforsmokeinhalation, carbon mon
oxide poisoning, cyanide poisoning, other event-related
 trauma, or, if suspected, further evidence of child abuse.
 Treatment
 Burntreatment consists of relieving pain, prevent
ing infection, and maintaining body fluids, electro
lytes, and calorie intake while the body heals.
 Treatment of chemical or electrical burns is slightly
 different from the treatment of thermal burns but the
 objectives are the same.
 Thermal burn treatment
 The first act of thermal burn treatment is to stop
 the burning process. This may be accomplished by
 letting cool water run over the burned area or by
 soaking it in cool (not cold) water. Ice should never
 be applied to the burn. Cool (not cold) wet compresses
 may provide some pain relief when applied to small
 areas of first- and second-degree burns. Butter, short
ening, or similar salve should never be applied to the
 burn since it prevents heat from escaping and drives
 the burning process deeper into the skin.
 If the burn is minor, it may be cleaned gently with
 soap and water. Blisters should not be broken. If the
 skin of the burnedareais unbrokenanditisnot likely to
 be further irritated by pressure or friction, the burn should be left exposed to the air to promote healing.If
 the skin is broken or apt to be disturbed,the burned area
 should be coated lightly with an antibacterial ointment
 and covered with a sterile bandage.Aspirin,acetamino
phen(Tylenol),or ibuprofen(Advil)maybe taken to
 ease pain and relieve inflammation.A doctor should be
 consulted if these signs of infection appear: increased
 warmth, redness, pain, or swelling; pus or similar
 drainage from the wound; swollen lymphnodes; or
 red streaks spreading away from the burn.
 In situations where a person has received mod
erate or critical burns, life saving measures take pre
cedence over burn treatment and emergency medical
 assistance must be called. A person with serious
 burns may stop breathing, and artificial respiration
 (also called mouth-to-mouth resuscitation or rescue
 breathing) should be administered immediately.
 Also,a person with burns covering more than 12%
 BSA is likely to go into shock; this condition maybe
 prevented by laying the person flat and elevating
 the feet about 12 in (30 cm). Burned arms and
 hands should also be raised higher than the person’s
 heart.
 In rescues,a blanket maybe used to smother any
 flames as the person is removed from danger. The
 person whose clothing is on fire should ‘‘stop,drop,
 and roll’’or be assisted in lying flat on the ground and
 rolling to put out the fire.Afterwards,only burnt cloth
ing that comes off easily should be removed;any cloth
ing embedded in the burn should not be disturbed.
 Removing any smoldering apparel and covering the
 person with a light,cool,wet cloth,such as a sheet but
 not a blanket or towel,will stop the burning process.
  At the hospital, the staff will provide further
 medical treatment. A tube to aid breathing may be
 inserted if the patient’s airways or lungs have been
 damaged,ascanhappenduringanexplosionorafire
 in a enclosed space. Also, because burns dramatically
 deplete the body of fluids, replacement fluids are
 administered intravenously. The patient is also
 given antibiotics intravenously to prevent infection,
 andheorshemayalsoreceiveatetanusshot,depend
ing on his or her immunization history. Once the
 burned area is cleaned and treated with antibiotic
 cream or ointment, it is covered in sterile bandages,
 which are changed two to three times a day. Surgical
 removalofdeadtissue(debridement) also takes place.
 As the burns heal, thick, taut scabs (eschar) form,
 which the doctor may have to cut to improve blood
 flow to the more elastic healthy tissue beneath. The
 patient will also undergo physical and occupational
 therapy to keep the burned areas from becoming
 inflexible and to minimize scarring.
 In cases where the skin has been so damagedthat
 it cannot properly heal, a skin graft is usually per
formed. A skin graft involves taking a piece of skin
 from an unburned portion of the patient’s body
 (autograft) and transplanting it to the burned area.
 When doctors cannot immediately use the patient’s
 own skin, a temporary graft is performed using the
 skin of a human donor (allograft), either alive or
 dead, or the skin of an animal (xenograft), usually
 that of a pig.
 The burn victim also may be placed in a hyperba
ric chamber, if one is available. In a hyperbaric cham
ber (which can be a specialized room or enclosed
 space), the patient is exposed to pure oxygen under
 high pressure, which can aid in healing. However, for
 this therapy to be effective, the patient must be placed
 in a chamber within 24 hours of being burned.
 Chemical burn treatment
 Burns from liquid chemicals must be rinsed with
 cool water for at least 15 minutes to stop the burning
 process. Anyburntotheeyemustbesimilarlyflushed
 with water. In cases of burnsfrom drychemicalssuch
 as lime, the powder should be completely brushed
 away before the area is washed. Any clothing which
 may have absorbed the chemical should be removed.
 Theburnshouldthenbelooselycoveredwithasterile
 gauze pad and the person taken to the hospital for
 further treatment. A physician may be able to neu
tralize the offending chemical with another before
 treating the burn like a thermal burn of similar
 severity.
 Electrical burn treatment
 Before electrical burns are treated at the site of the
 accident, the power source must be disconnected if
 possible and the victim moved away from it to keep
 the person giving aid from being electrocuted.
 Lifesaving measures again take priority over burn
 treatment, so breathing must be checked and assisted
 if necessary. Electrical burns should be loosely covered
 with sterile gauze pads and the person taken to the
 hospital for further treatment.
 Alternative treatment
 In addition to the excellent treatment of burns
 provided by traditional medicine, some alternative
 approaches maybehelpful aswell. (Major burns should
 always be treated by a medical practitioner.) The
 homeopathic remedies Cantharis and Causticum can
 assist in burn healing. A number of botanical remedies,
 applied topically, can also help burns heal. These
 include aloe (Aloe barbadensis), oil of St.-John’s-wort
 (Hypericum perforatum), calendula (Calendula officina
lis), comfrey (Symphytum officinale), and tea tree oil
 (Melaleuca spp.). Supplementing the diet with vitamin
 C, vitamin E, and zinc also is beneficial for wound
 healing.
 Prognosis
 Theprognosis is dependent uponthe degree ofthe
 burn, the amount of body surface covered, whether
 critical body parts were affected, any additional inju
ries or complications like infection, and the prompt
ness of medical treatment. Minor burns may heal in
 five to 10 days with no scarring. Moderate burns may  heal in 10-14 days and may leave scarring. Critical
 or major burns take more than 14 days to heal and
 will leave significant scarring. Scar tissue may limit
 mobility and functionality, but physical therapy may
 overcome these limitations. In some cases, additional
 surgery may be advisable to remove scar tissue and
 restore appearance.
 Prevention
 Burns are commonly received in residential fires.
 Properly placed and working smoke detectors in combi
nation with rapid evacuation plans will minimize a per
son’s exposure to smokeandflamesintheeventofafire.
 Children must be taught never to play with matches,
 lighters, fireworks, gasoline, and cleaning fluids.
 Burns by scalding with hot water or other liquids
 may be prevented by setting the water heater thermo
stat no higher than 120F (49C), checking the tem
perature of bath water before getting into the tub, and
 turning pot handles on the stove out of the reach of
 children. Care should be used when removing covers
 from pans of steaming foods and when uncovering or
 opening foods heated in a microwave oven.
 Thermal burns are often received from electrical
 appliances. Care should be exercised around stoves,
 space heaters, irons, and curling irons.
 Sunburns may be avoided by the liberal use of a
 sunscreen containing eitheranopaque activeingredient
 such as zinc oxide or titanium dioxide or a nonopaque
 active ingredient such as PABA (para-aminobenzoic
 acid) or benzophenone. Hats, loose clothing, and
 umbrellas also provide protection, especially between
 10 A.M. and 3 P.M. when the most damaging ultra
violet rays are present in direct sunlight.
 Electrical burns may be prevented by covering
 unused electrical outlets with safety plugs and keeping
 electrical cords away from infants and toddlers who
 might chew on them. Persons should also seek shelter
 indoors during a thunderstorm to avoid being struck
 by lightning.
 Chemical burns may be prevented by wearing
 protective clothing, including gloves and eyeshields.
 Chemical agents should always be used according to
 the manufacturer’s instructions and properly stored
 when not in use. 