Definition
Death is defined as the cessation of all vital functions of the body including the heartbeat, brain activity (including the brain stem), and breathing.
Description
Death comes in many forms, whether it be
expected after a diagnosis of terminal illness or an
unexpected accident or medical condition.
Terminal illness
When a terminal illness is diagnosed, a person,
family, friends, and physicians are all able to prepare
for the impending death. A terminally ill individual goes
through several levels of emotional acceptance while in
the process of dying. First, there is denial and isolation.
This is followed by anger and resentment. Thirdly, a
person tries to escape the inevitable.With the realization
that death is eminent, most people suffer from depression. Lastly, the reality of death is realized and accepted.
Causes and symptoms
The two leading causes of death for both men
and women in the United States are heart disease
and cancer. Accidental death was a distant third followed by such problems as stroke, chronic lung disorders, pneumonia, suicide, cirrhosis, diabetes mellitus,
and murder. The order of these causes of death varies
among persons of different age, ethnicity, and gender.
Diagnosis
In an age of organ transplantation, identifying the
moment of death may now involve another life. It
thereby takes on supreme legal importance. It is largely due to the need for transplant organs that death
has been so precisely defined.
The official signs of death include the following:
 no pupil reaction to light
 no response of the eyes to caloric (warm or cold)
stimulation
 no jaw reflex (the jaw will react like the knee if hit
with a reflex hammer)
 no gag reflex (touching the back of the throat induces
vomiting)
 no response to pain
 no breathing
 a body temperature above 86 8F (30 8C), which
eliminates the possibility of resuscitation following
cold-water drowning
 no other cause for the above, such as a head injury
 no drugs present in the body that could cause apparent death
 all of the above for 12 hours
 all of the above for six hours and a flat-line electroencephalogram (brain wave study)
 no blood circulating to the brain, as demonstrated by
angiography
Current ability to resuscitate people who have
‘‘died’’ has produced some remarkable stories.
Drowning in cold water (under 50 8F/10 8C) so effectively slows metabolism that some persons have been
revived after a half hour under water.
Treatment
Only recently has there been concerted public
effort to address the care of the dying in an effort to
improve their comfort and lessen their alienation from
those still living. Hospice care represents one of the
greatest advances made in this direction. There has
also been a liberalization of the use of narcotics and
other drugs for symptomatic relief and improvement
in the quality of life for the dying.
Living will
One of the most difficult issues surrounding death in
the era of technology is that there is now a choice, not of
the event itself, but of its timing. When to die, and more
often, when to let a loved one die, is coming within
people’s power to determine. This is both a blessing and
a dilemma. Insofar as the decision can be made ahead of
time, a living will is an attempt to address this dilemma.
By outlining the conditions under which one would
rather be allowed to die, a person can contribute significantly to that final decision, even if not competent to do
so at the time of actual death. The problem is that there
are uncertainties surrounding every severely ill person.
Each instance presents a greater or lesser chance of survival. The chance is often greater than zero. The best
living will follows an intimate discussion with decision
makers covering the many possible scenarios surrounding the end of life. This discussion is difficult, for few
people like to contemplate their own demise. However,
the benefits of a living will are substantial, both to physicians and to loved ones who are faced withmaking final
decisions. Most states have passed living will laws, honoringinstructions on artificiallife supportthatweremade
while a person was still mentally competent.
Euthanasia
Another issue that has received much attention is
assisted suicide (euthanasia). In 1997, the State of
Oregon placed the issue on the ballot, amid much
consternation and dispute. Perhaps the main reason
euthanasia has become front page news is because
Dr. Jack Kevorkian, a pathologist from Michigan, is
one of its most vocal advocates. The issue highlights the
many new problems generated by increasing ability to
intervene effectively in the final moments of life and
unnaturally prolong the process of dying. The public
appearance of euthanasia has also stimulated discussion about more compassionate care of the dying.
Prevention
Autopsy after death is a way to precisely determine
a cause of death. The word autopsy is derived from
Greek meaning to see with one’s own eyes. A pathologist extensively examines a body and submits a
detailed report to an attending physician. Although
an autopsy can do nothing for an individual after
death, it can benefit the family and, in some cases,
medical science. Hereditary disorders and disease
may be found. This knowledge could be used to prevent illness in other family members. Information
culled from an autopsy can be used to further medical
research. The link between smoking and lung cancer
was confirmed from data gathered through autopsy.
Early information about AIDS was also compiled
through autopsy reports.t