Definition
Decompression sickness (DCS) is a dangerous
and occasionally lethal condition caused by nitrogen
bubbles that form in the blood and other tissues of
scuba divers who surface too quickly.
Description
According to the Divers Alert Network (DAN), a
worldwide organization devoted to safe-diving research
and promotion, less than 1% of divers fall victim to DCS
or the rarer bubble problem called gas embolism, air
embolism, or arterial gas embolism (AGE). A study of
theUnited Statesmilitary communityinOkinawa,where
tens of thousands of sport and military dives are made
each year, identified 84 DCS and 10 AGE cases in 1989–
95, including nine deaths. This translated into estimates
of one case in every 7,400 dives and one death in every
76,900 dives.DCS symptoms can be quitemild, however,
and many cases certainly go unnoticed by divers.
At times the terminology adopted by writers onDCS
can be confusing. Some substitute the term decompression illness (DCI) for DCS. Others treat DCI as a label
encompassing both DCS and AGE. An older term for
DCS is caisson disease, coined in the nineteenth century
when it was discovered that bridge construction crews
working at the bottom of lakes and rivers in large pressurized enclosures (caissons) were experiencing joint pain
(a typical DCS symptom) on returning to the surface.
Causes and symptoms
The air we breathe is mostly a mixture of two gases,
nitrogen (78%) and oxygen (21%). Unlike oxygen,
nitrogen is a biologically inert gas, meaning that it is
not metabolized (converted into other substances) by
the body. For this reason, most of the nitrogen we
inhale is expelled when we exhale, but some is dissolved
into the blood and other tissues. During a dive, however, the lungs take in more nitrogen than usual. This
happens because the surrounding water pressure is
greater than the air pressure at sea level (twice as great
at 33 ft [10 m], for instance). As the water pressure
increases, so does the pressure of the nitrogen in the
compressed air inhaled by the diver. Because increased
pressure causes an increase in gas density, the diver
takes in more nitrogen with each breath than he or she
would at sea level. Instead of being exhaled, however,
the extra nitrogen safely dissolves into the tissues, where
it remains until the diver begins his or her return to the
surface (under some circumstances the extra nitrogen
can cause nitrogen narcosis, but that condition is distinct from DCS). On the way up, decompression occurs
(in other words, the water pressure drops), and with the
change in pressure, the extra nitrogen gradually diffuses
out of the tissues and is delivered by the bloodstream to
the lungs, which expel it from the body. If the diver
surfaces too quickly, however, potentially dangerous
nitrogen bubbles can form in the tissues and cause
 DCS. These bubbles can compress nerves, obstruct
arteries, veins, and lymphatic vessels, and trigger harmful chemical reactions in the blood. The precise reasons
for bubble formation remain unclear.
How much extra nitrogen enters the tissues varies
with the dive’s depth and duration. Dive tables prepared
by the U.S. Navy and other organizations specify how
long most divers can safely remain at a particular depth.
If the dive table limits are exceeded, the diver must pause
on the way up to allow the nitrogen to diffuse into the
bloodstream without forming bubbles; these pauses are
called decompression stops, and are carefully calibrated.
DCS can occur, however, even when a diver obeys safe
diving rules. In such cases, the predisposing factors
include fatigue, obesity, dehydration, hypothermia, and
recent alcohol use. People who fly or travel to highaltitude locations without letting 12–24 hours pass
after their last dive are at risk for DCS as well because
their bodies undergo further decompression. This is true
even when flying in commercial aircraft. Many travelers
are unaware that to save money on fuel the cabin pressure in commercial aircraft is set much lower than the
pressure at sea level. At 30,000 ft (9,144 m), for instance,
cabin pressure is usually equivalent to the pressure at
7,000–8,000 ft (2,133–2,438 m) above sea level, a safe
setting for everyone but recent divers. Exactly how long
a diver should wait before flying or traveling to a highaltitude location depends on how much diving he or she
has done and other considerations. If thereis uncertainty
about the appropriate waiting period, the sensible
course of action is to let the full 24 hours pass.
Because the nitrogen bubbles that cause DCS can
affect any of the body’s tissues, including the blood,
bones, nerves, and muscles, many kinds of symptoms are
possible. Symptoms can appear minutes after a diver surfaces, and in about 80% of cases do so within eight hours.
Pain is often the only symptom; this is sometimes called
the bends, althoughmany peopleincorrectly use that term
as a synonym for DCS itself. The pain, which ranges from
mild to severe,isusuallylimited to thejoints,butcanbe felt
anywhere. Severe itching (pruritis), skin rashes, and
skin mottling (cutis marmorata) are other possible symptoms. All of these are sometimes classified as manifestations of type 1 or ‘‘mild’’ DCS. Type 2 or ‘‘serious’’ DCS
can lead, among other things, to paralysis, brain damage,
heart attacks, and death. Many DCS victims, however,
experience both type 1 and type 2 symptoms.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis requires taking a medical history (questioning the patient about his or her health and recent
activities) and conducting a physical examination.
Treatment
DCS is treated by giving the patient oxygen and
placing him or her in a hyperbaric chamber, an
enclosure in which the air pressure is first gradually
increased and then gradually decreased. This shrinks
the bubbles and allows the nitrogen to safely diffuse
out of the tissues. Hyperbaric chamber facilities exist
throughout the United States. No matter how mild
one’s symptoms may appear, immediate transportation to a facility is essential. Treatment is necessary
even if the symptoms clear up before the facility is
reached, because bubbles may still be in the bloodstream and pose a threat. DAN maintains a list of
facilities and a 24-hour hotline that can provide advice
on handling DCS and other diving emergencies.
Prognosis
DCS sufferers who undergo chamber treatment
within a few hours of symptom onset usually enjoy a
full recovery. If treatment is delayed the consequences
are less predictable, although many people have been
helped even after several days have passed. A 1992
DAN report on diving accidents indicated that full
recovery following chamber treatment was immediate
for about 50% of divers. Some people, however, suffer
numbness, tingling, or other symptoms that last weeks,
months, or even a lifetime. In the Okinawa study, six
of the 94 patients experienced ‘‘long-lasting’’ symptoms even after repeated chamber treatments.
Prevention
The obvious way to minimize the risk of falling
victim to DCS is to follow the rules on safe diving and
air travel after a dive. People who are obese, suffer
from lung or heart problems, or are otherwise in poor
health should not dive. And because the effect of nitrogen diffusion on the fetus remains unknown,
diving while pregnant is not recommended.