Definition
Decongestants are medicines used to relieve nasal
congestion (stuffy nose).
Purpose
A congested or stuffy nose is a common symptom
of colds and allergies. This congestion results when
membranes lining the nose become swollen.
Decongestants relieve the swelling by narrowing the
blood vessels that supply the nose. This reduces the
blood supply to the swollen membranes, causing
the membranes to shrink.
These medicines do not cure colds or reverse the
effects of histamines—chemicals released as part of the
allergic reaction.Theywill not relieve all of the symptoms
associated with colds and allergies, only the stuffiness.
When considering whether to use a decongestant
for cold symptoms, keep in mind that most colds go
away with or without treatment and that taking medicine is not the only way to relieve a stuffy nose.
Drinking hot tea or broth or eating chicken soup
may help. There are also adhesive strips can be placed
on the nose to help widen the nasal passages, making
breathing through the nasal passages a bit easier when
congestion is present.
Precautions
Decongestant nasal sprays and nose drops may
cause a problem called rebound congestion if used
repeatedly over several days. When this happens, the
nose remains stuffy or gets worse with every dose. The
only way to stop the cycle is to stop using the drug.
The stuffiness should then go away within about a
week. Anyone who shows signs of severe rebound
congestion should also contact his or her physician.
Do not use decongestant nasal sprays for more
than three days. Decongestants taken by mouth
should not be used for more than seven days. If the
congestion has not gone away in this time, or if the
symptoms are accompanied by fever, call a physician.
Do not use a decongestant nasal spray after the
product’s expiration date. If the product has become
cloudy or discolored, throw it away and do not use it.
Do not share droppers or spray bottles with anyone
else, as this could spread infection. Do not let droppers
and bottle tips touch countertops or other surfaces.
Some decongestants cause drowsiness. People
who takes these drugs should not drive, use machines
or do anything else that might be dangerous until they
have found out how the drugs affect them.
In general, older people may be more sensitive to
the effects of decongestants and may need to take
lower doses to avoid side effects. People in this age
group should not take long-acting (extended release)
forms of decongestants unless they have previously
taken a short-acting form with no ill effects.
Children may also be more sensitive to the effects
of decongestants. Before giving any decongestant to a
child, check the package label carefully. Some of these
medicines are too strong for use in children. Serious
side effects are possible if they are given large amounts
of these drugs or if they swallow nose drops, nasal
spray or eye drops. If this happens, call a physician
or poison center immediately.
Special conditions
People with certain medical conditions or who are
taking certain other medicines can have problems if
they take decongestants. Before taking these drugs, be
sure to let the physician know about any of these
conditions:
 ALLERGIES. Anyone who has had unusual reactions to decongestants in the past should let his or
her physician know before these drugs or any similar
drugs are prescribed. The physician should also be told
about any allergies to foods, dyes, preservatives, or
other substances.
 PREGNANCY. In studies of laboratory animals,
some decongestants have had unwanted effects on
fetuses. However, it is not known whether such effects
also occur in people. Women who are pregnant or who
plan to become pregnant should check with their physicians before taking decongestants.
 BREASTFEEDING. Some decongestants pass into
breast milk and may have unwanted effects on nursing
babies whose mothers take the drugs. Women who
are breastfeeding should check with their physicians
before using decongestants. If they need to take the
medicine, it may be necessary to bottle feed the baby
with formula while taking it.
OTHER MEDICAL CONDITIONS. Anyone with heart
or blood vessel disease, high blood pressure, diabetes,
enlarged prostate, or overactive thyroid should not
take decongestants unless under a physician’s supervision. The medicine can increase blood sugar in people with diabetes. It can be especially dangerous in
people with high blood pressure, as it may increase
blood pressure.
Before using decongestants, people with any of
these medical problems should make sure their physicians are aware of their conditions:
 glaucoma
 history of mental illness
Decongestants may have a variety of side effects,
and may also interact with other medications the
patient is taking.
Side effects
DECONGESTANT NASAL SPRAYS AND NOSE
 DROPS. The most common side effects from decongestant nasal sprays and nose drops are sneezing and
temporary burning, stinging, or dryness. These effects
are usually temporary and do not need medical attention. If any of the following side effects occur after
using a decongestant nasal spray or nose drops, stop
using the medicine immediately and call the physician:
 increased blood pressure
 headache
 fast, slow, or fluttery heartbeat
 nervousness
 dizziness
 nausea
 sleep problems
DECONGESTANTS TAKEN BY MOUTH. The most
common side effects of decongestants taken by
mouth are nervousness, restlessness, excitability, dizziness, drowsiness, headache, nausea, weakness, and
sleep problems. Anyone who has these symptoms
while taking decongestants should stop taking them
immediately.
Patients who have these symptoms while taking
decongestants should call the physician immediately:
 increased blood pressure
 fast, irregular, or fluttery heartbeat
 severe headache
 tightness or discomfort in the chest
 breathing problems
 fear or anxiety
 hallucinations
 trembling or shaking
 convulsions (seizures)
 pale skin
 painful or difficult urination
Other side effects may occur. Anyone who has
unusual symptoms after taking a decongestant should
get in touch with his or her physician.
Interactions with other medicines
Decongestants may interact with a variety of
other medicines. When this happens, the effects of
one or both of the drugs may change or the risk
of side effects may be greater. Do not take decongestants at the same time as these drugs:
 Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAO inhibitors)
such as phenzeline (Nardil) or tranylcypromine
(Parnate), used to treat conditions including depression and Parkinson’s disease. Do not take decongestants at the same time as a MAO inhibitor or within
two weeks of stopping treatment with an MAO
inhibitor unless a physician approves.
 Other products containing the same or other
decongestants
 Caffeine.
In addition, anyone who takes decongestants
should let the physician know all other medicines he
or she is taking. Among the drugs that may interact
with decongestants are:
 tricyclic antidepressants such as imipramine
(Tofranil) or desipramine (Norpramin)
 the antidepressant maprotiline (Ludiomil)
 amantadine (Symmetrel)
 amphetamines
 medicine to relieve asthmaor other breathing problems
 methylphenidate (Ritalin)
  appetite suppressants
 other medicine for colds, sinus problems, hay fever
or other allergies
 beta-blockers such as atenolol (Tenormin) and
propranolol (Inderal)
 digitalis glycosides, used to treat heart conditions
The list above does not include every drug that
may interact with decongestants. Be sure to check with
a physician or pharmacist before combining decongestants with any other prescription or nonprescription
(over-the-counter) medicine.
Description
Decongestants are sold in many forms, including
tablets, capsules, caplets, gelcaps, liqui-caps, liquids,
nasal sprays, and nose drops. These drugs are sometimes combined with other medicines in cold and
allergy products designed to relieve several symptoms.
Some decongestant products require a physician’s prescription, but there are also many nonprescription
(over-the-counter) products. Ask a physician or pharmacist about choosing an appropriate decongestant.
Commonly used decongestants include oxymetazoline (Afrin and other brands) and pseudoephedrine
(Sudafed, Actifed, and other brands). The decongestant oxymetazoline is also used in some eye drops to
relieve redness and itching.
The recommended dosage depends on the drug.
Check with the physician who prescribed the drug or
the pharmacist who filled the prescription for the correct
dosage, and always take the medicine exactly as directed.
If using nonprescription (over-the-counter) types, follow
the directions on the package label or ask a pharmacist
for assistance. Never take larger or more frequent doses,
and do not take the drug for longer than directed.
Risks
Anyone considering taking a decongestant should
take a close look at the labels of any already in their
medicine cabinet. In 2000, the Food and Drug
Administration prohibited over-the-counter sales of
medicines containing the decongestant phenylpropanolamine. The medicine is associated with an
increased risk of stroke in people ages 18 to 49, especially women. Many cold remedies contained this
medicine. Contact a pharmacist if there is any question
about the ingredients in a medication. Over-thecounter remedies containing phenylpropanolamine
should be discarded.
Normal results
The desired result when taking decongestants is
the short-term relief of nasal congestion.