Definition
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) is a blood clot in a
major vein, usually in the legs and/or pelvis.
Description
Deep vein thrombosis is a common but difficult to
detect illness that can be fatal if not treated effectively.
According to the American Heart Association, more
than two million Americans develop deep vein thrombosis annually. An estimated 600,000 of these develop
pulmonary embolism, a potentially fatal complication
where the blood clots break off and form pulmonary
emboli, plugs that block the lung arteries. Sixty thousand people die of pulmonary embolism each year.
Deep vein thrombosis is also called venous thromboembolism, thrombophlebitis or phlebothrombosis.
Deep vein thrombosis is a major complication in
patients who have had orthopedic surgery or pelvic,
abdominal, or thoracic surgery. Patients with cancer
and other chronic illnesses (including congestive heart
failure), as well as those who have suffered a recent
myocardial infarction, are also at high risk for developing DVT. Deep vein thrombosis can be chronic,
with recurrent episodes.
Causes and symptoms
Deep vein thrombosis is caused by blood clots in
blood vessels that form in veins where blood flow is
sluggish or has been disturbed, in pockets in the calf’s
deep veins, or in veins that have been traumatized.
Symptoms include swelling and tenderness of the calf
or thigh, and possibly warmth. Only 23–50% of
patients experience symptoms, so it’s often ‘‘silent.’’
Some individuals and families have underlying clotting tendencies that can be tested for.
Diagnosis
Deep vein thrombosis can be detected through
venography and radionuclide venography, Doppler
ultrasonography, and impedance plethysmography.
Venography is the most accurate test, but it is not
used much, because it is often painful, expensive,
exposes the patient to radiation, and can cause reactions and complications. Venography identifies the
location, extent, and degree of attachment of the
blood clots, and enables the condition of the deep
leg veins to be assessed. A contrast solution is
injected into a foot vein through a catheter. The
physician observes the movement of the solution
through the vein with a fluoroscope while a series
of x rays are taken. Venography takes 30–45 minutes
and can be done in a physician’s office, a laboratory,
or a hospital. Radionuclide venography, in which a
radioactive isotope is injected, is occasionally used,
especially if a patient has had reactions to contrast
solutions.
Doppler ultrasonography is usually the preferred
procedure for detecting deep vein thrombosis. This
technique uses sound waves to measure blood flow
through leg veins and arteries. A blood pressure cuff
is wrapped around the patient’s ankle and a transducer with gel on it is placed over pulse points of the
foot and lower leg. High-frequency sounds bounce
off the soft tissue, and the echoes are converted into
images on a monitor. It is very accurate in detecting
clots above the knee that can become pulmonary
embolisms. Usually performed in a physician’s office
or hospital outpatient diagnostic center, Doppler
ultrasound usually takes 30–45 minutes.
Impedance plethysmography records changes in
blood volume and vessel resistance. A blood pressure
cuff is wrapped around the leg above the knee, four
electrodes are placed near the knee and the ankle, and
the cuff is inflated. How efficiently the veins return to
normal is measured. Performed in a physician’s office,
it takes about 15 minutes.
Treatment
Deep vein thrombosis can be treated with drug
therapy, bed rest, and gradient elastic stockings.
Medications include anticoagulants that ‘‘thin’’
blood to prevent further growth of blood clots, as
well as clot-dissolving drugs. Heparin is a common
injectable anticoagulant, and is usually followed by
coumadin tablets for at least three months. Bed rest
with the patient’s legs elevated is necessary until the
condition improves. Gradient elastic stockings should
then be worn, and standing for long periods of time
avoided. In some cases, a filter is placed in the major
vein (the inferior vena cava) to trap emboli or clots
before they get to the heart and lungs.
Alternative treatment
Deep vein thrombosis can be life-threatening and
must be treated with conventional medical therapies.
However, there are alternative therapies that can be
used in conjunction with emergency treatments to dissolve the clot that help support the body and prevent
recurrence. A trained alternative health care practitioner should be consulted due to the severity of this
condition.
Prognosis
In many cases, deep vein thrombosis can be successfully treated if diagnosed early.
Prevention
Deep vein thrombosis can be prevented through
prophylactic anticoagulant drugs and venous stasis
prevention with gradient elastic stockings and intermittent pneumatic compression of the legs. High-risk
patients often need to remain on anticoagulants like
Coumadin indefinitely