Definition
Dehydration is the loss of water and salts essential
for normal body function.
Description
Dehydration occurs when the body loses more fluid
than it takes in. This condition can result from illness; a
hot, dry climate; prolonged exposure to sun or high
temperatures; not drinking enough water; and overuse
of diuretics or other medications that increase urination. Dehydration can upset the delicate fluid-salt balance needed to maintain healthy cells and tissues.
Water accounts for about 60% of a man’s body
weight. It represents about 50% of a woman’s weight.
Young and middle-aged adults who drink when
they’re thirsty do not generally have to do anything
more to maintain their body’s fluid balance. Children
need more water because they expend more energy,
but most children who drink when they are thirsty get
as much water as their systems require.
Age and dehydration
Adults over the age of 60 who drink only when
they are thirsty probably get only about 90% of the
fluid they need. Developing a habit of drinking only in
response to the body’s thirst signals raises an older
person’s risk of becoming dehydrated. Seniors who
have relocated to areas where the weather is warmer
or dryer than the climate they are accustomed to are
even likelier to become dehydrated unless they make it
a practice to drink even when they are not thirsty.
Dehydration in children usually results from losing large amounts of fluid and not drinking enough
water to replace the loss. This condition generally
occurs in children who have stomach flu characterized
by vomiting and diarrhea, or who can not or will not
take enough fluids to compensate for excessive losses
associated with fever and sweating of acute illness. An
infant can become dehydrated only hours after
becoming ill. Dehydration is a major cause of infant
illness and death throughout the world.
Types of dehydration
Mild dehydration is the loss of no more than 5%
of the body’s fluid. Loss of 5–10% is considered
moderate dehydration. Severe dehydration (loss of
10–15% of body fluids) is a life-threatening condition
that requires immediate medical care.
Complications of dehydration
When the body’s fluid supply is severely depleted,
hypovolemic shock is likely to occur. This condition,
which is also called physical collapse, is characterized
by pale, cool, clammy skin; rapid heartbeat; and shallow breathing.
Blood pressure sometimes drops so low it can not
be measured, and skin at the knees and elbows may
become blotchy. Anxiety, restlessness, and thirst
increase. After the patient’s temperature reaches
107 8F (41.7 8C) damage to the brain and other vital
organs occurs quickly.
Causes and symptoms
Strenuous activity, excessive sweating, high fever,
and prolonged vomiting or diarrhea are common
causes of dehydration. So are staying in the sun too
long, not drinking enough fluids, and visiting or moving to a warm region where it doesn’t often rain.
Alcohol, caffeine, and diuretics or other medications
that increase the amount of fluid excreted can cause
dehydration.
Reduced fluid intake can be a result of:
 appetite loss associated with acute illness
 excessive urination (polyuria)
 nausea
 bacterial or viral infection or inflammation of the
pharynx (pharyngitis)
 inflammation of the mouth caused by illness, infection, irritation, or vitamin deficiency (stomatitis)
Other conditions that can lead to dehydration
include:
 disease of the adrenal glands, which regulate the
body’s water and salt balance and the function of
many organ systems
 diabetes mellitus
 eating disorders
 kidney disease
 chronic lung disease.
An infant who does not wet a diaper in an eighthour period is dehydrated. The soft spot on the baby’s
head (fontanel) may be depressed. Symptoms of dehydration at any age include cracked lips, dry or sticky
mouth, lethargy, and sunken eyes. A person who is
dehydrated cries without shedding tears and does not
urinate very often. The skin is less elastic than it should
be and is slow to return to its normal position after
being pinched.
Dehydration can cause confusion, constipation,
discomfort, drowsiness, fever, and thirst. The skin
turns pale and cold, the mucous membranes lining
the mouth and nose lose their natural moisture. The
pulse sometimes races and breathing becomes rapid.
Significant fluid loss can cause serious neurological
problems.
Diagnosis
The patient’s symptoms and medical history
usually suggest dehydration. Physical examination
may reveal shock, rapid heart rate, and/or low blood
pressure. Laboratory tests, including blood tests (to
check electrolyte levels) and urine tests (e.g., urine
specific gravity and creatinine), are used to evaluate
the severity of the problem. Other laboratory tests
may be ordered to determine the underlying condition
(such as diabetes or an adrenal gland disorder) causing
the dehydration.
Treatment
Increased fluid intake and replacement of lost
electrolytes are usually sufficient to restore fluid balances in patients who are mildly or moderately dehydrated. For individuals who are mildly dehydrated,
just drinking plain water may be all the treatment
that is needed. Adults who need to replace lost electrolytes may drink sports beverages (e.g., Gatorade
or Recharge) or consume a little additional salt.
Parents should follow label instructions when giving
children Pedialyte or other commercial products
recommended to relieve dehydration. Children who
are dehydrated should receive only clear fluids for the
first 24 hours.
A child who is vomiting should sip one or two
teaspoons of liquid every 10 minutes. A child who is
less than a year old and who is not vomiting should be
given one tablespoon of liquid every 20 minutes. A
child who is more than one year old and who is not
vomiting should take two tablespoons of liquid every
30 minutes. A baby who is being breast-fed should be
given clear liquids for two consecutive feedings
before breastfeeding is resumed. A bottle-fed baby
should be given formula diluted to half its strength
for the first 24 hours after developing symptoms of
dehydration.
In order to accurately calculate fluid loss, it’s
important to chart weight changes every day and
keep a record of how many times a patient vomits or
has diarrhea. Parents should note how many times a
baby’s diaper must be changed.
Children and adults can gradually return to their
normal diet after they have stopped vomiting and no
longer have diarrhea. Bland foods should be reintroduced first, with other foods added as the digestive
system is able to tolerate them. Milk, ice cream,
cheese, and butter should not be eaten until 72 hours
after symptoms have disappeared.
Medical care
Severe dehydration can require hospitalization
and intravenous fluid replacement. If an individual’s
blood pressure drops enough to cause or threaten the
development of shock, medical treatment is usually
required. A doctor should be notified whenever an
infant or child exhibits signs of dehydration or a parent is concerned that a stomach virus or other acute
illness may lead to dehydration.
a doctor should also be notified if:
 a child less than three months old develops a fever
higher than 100 8F (37.8 8C)
 a child more than three months old develops a fever
higher than 102 8F (38.9 8C)
 symptoms of dehydration worsen
 an individual urinates very sparingly or does not
urinate at all during a six-hour period
 dizziness, listlessness, or excessive thirst occur
 a person who is dieting and using diuretics loses more
than 3 lb (1.3 kg) in a day or more than 5 lb (2.3 kg) a
week
When treating dehydration, the underlying cause
must also be addressed. For example, if dehydration is
caused by vomiting or diarrhea, medications may be
prescribed to resolve these symptoms. Patients who
are dehydrated due to diabetes, kidney disease, or
adrenal gland disorders must receive treatment for
these conditions as well as for the resulting
dehydration.
Alternative treatment
Gelatin water can be substituted for electrolytereplacement solutions. It is made by diluting a 3-oz
package in a quart of water or by adding one-quarter
teaspoon of salt and a tablespoon of sugar to a pint of
water.
Prognosis
Mild dehydration rarely results in complications.
If the cause is eliminated and lost fluid is replaced,
mild dehydration can usually be cured in 24–48 hours.
Vomiting and diarrhea that continue for several
days without adequate fluid replacement can be fatal.
The risk of life-threatening complications is greater for
young children and the elderly. However, dehydration
that is rapidly recognized and treated has a good
outcome.
Prevention
Patients who are vomiting or who have diarrhea
can prevent dehydration by drinking enough fluid for
their urine to remain the color of pale straw. Ensuring
that patients always drink adequate fluids during an
illness will help prevent dehydration. Infants and
young children with diarrhea and vomiting can be
given electrolyte solutions such as Pedialyte to help
prevent dehydration. People who are not ill can
maintain proper fluid balance by drinking several
glasses of water before going outside on a hot day. It
is also a good idea to avoid coffee and tea, which
increase body temperature and water loss.
Patients should know whether any medication
they are taking can cause dehydration and should get
prompt medical care to correct any underlying condition that increases the risk of dehydration.
Other methods of preventing dehydration and
ensuring adequate fluid intake include:
 eating more soup at mealtime
 drinking plenty of water and juice at mealtime and
between meals
 keeping a glass of water nearby when working or
relaxing