Definition
Delirium is a state of mental confusion that develops quickly and usually fluctuates in intensity.
Description
Delirium is a syndrome, or group of symptoms,
caused by a disturbance in the normal functioning of
the brain. The delirious patient has a reduced awareness of and responsiveness to the environment, which
may be manifested as disorientation, incoherence, and
memory disturbance. Delirium is often marked by
hallucinations, delusions, and a dream-like state.
Delirium affects at least one in 10 hospitalized
patients, and is a common part of many terminal illnesses. Delirium is more common in the elderly than in
the general population. While it is not a specific disease itself, patients with delirium usually fare worse
than those with the same illness who do not have
delirium.
Causes and symptoms
Causes
There are a large number of possible causes of
delirium. Metabolic disorders are the single most common cause, accounting for 20–40% of all cases. This
type of delirium, termed ‘‘metabolic encephalopathy,’’
may result from organ failure, including liver or kidney
failure. Other metabolic causes include diabetes mellitus, hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism, vitamin deficiencies, and imbalances of fluids and electrolytes in the
blood. Severe dehydration can also cause delirium.
Drug intoxication (‘‘intoxication confusional
state’’) is responsible for up to 20% of delirium
cases, either from side effects, overdose, or deliberate
ingestion of a mind-altering substance. Medicinal
drugs with delirium as a possible side effect or result
of overdose include:
 anticholinergics, including atropine, scopolamine,
chlorpromazine (an antipsychotic), and diphenhydramine (an antihistamine)
 sedatives, including barbiturates, benzodiazepines,
and ethanol (drinking alcohol)
 antidepressant drugs
 anticonvulsant drugs
 nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs),
including ibuprofen and acetaminophen
 corticosteroids, including prednisone
 anticancer drugs, including methotrexate and
procarbazine
 lithium
 cimetidine
 antibiotics
 L-dopa
Delirium may result from ingestion of legal or
illegal psychoactive drugs, including:
 ethanol (drinking alcohol)
 marijuana
 LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide) and other
hallucinogens
 amphetamines
 cocaine
 opiates, including heroin and morphine
 PCP (phencyclidine)
 inhalants
Drug withdrawal may also cause delirium.
Delirium tremens, or ‘‘DTs,’’ may occur during alcohol withdrawal after prolonged or intense consumption. Withdrawal symptoms are also possible from
many of the psychoactive prescription drugs.
Poisons may cause delirium (‘‘toxic encephalopathy’’), including:
 solvents, such as gasoline, kerosene, turpentine,
benzene, and alcohols
 carbon monoxide
 refrigerants (Freon)
 heavy metals, such as lead, mercury, and arsenic
 insecticides, such as Parathion and Sevin
 mushrooms, such as Amanita species
 plants such as jimsonweed (Datura stramonium) and
morning glory (Ipomoea spp.)
 animal venoms
Other causes of delirium include:
 infection
 fever
 head trauma
 epilepsy
 brain hemorrhage or infarction
 brain tumor
 low blood oxygen (hypoxemia)
 high blood carbon dioxide (hypercapnia)
 post-surgical complication
Symptoms
The symptoms of delirium come on quickly, in
hours or days, in contrast to those of dementia,
which develop much more slowly. Delirium symptoms
typically fluctuate through the day, with periods of
relative calm and lucidity alternating with periods of
florid delirium. The hallmark of delirium is a fluctuating level of consciousness. Symptoms may include:
 decreased awareness of the environment
 confusion or disorientation, especially of time
 memory impairment, especially of recent events
  hallucinations
 illusions and misinterpreted stimuli
 increased or decreased activity level
 mood disturbance, possibly including anxiety,
euphoria or depression
 language or speech impairment
Diagnosis
Delirium is diagnosed through the medical history and recognition of symptoms during mental
status examination. The most important part of
diagnosis is determining the cause of the delirium.
Tests may include blood and urine analysis for levels
of drugs, fluids, electrolytes, and blood gases, and to
test for infection; lumbar puncture (‘‘spinal tap’’) to
test for central nervous system infection; x ray, computed tomography scans (CT), or magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) scans to look for tumors, hemorrhage,
or other brain abnormality; thyroid tests; electroencephalography (EEG); electrocardiography (ECG);
and possibly others as dictated by the likely cause.
Treatment
Treatment of delirium begins with recognizing
and treating the underlying cause. Delirium itself is
managed by reducing disturbing stimuli, or providing
soothing ones; use of simple, clear language in communication; and reassurance, especially from family
members. Physical restraints may be needed if the
patient is a danger to himself or others, or if he insists
on removing necessary medical equipment such as
intravenous lines or monitors. Sedatives or antipsychotic drugs may be used to reduce anxiety, hallucinations, and delusions.
Prognosis
Persons with delirium usually have a worse prognosis for the underlying disease than the person without delirium. Nonetheless, those without terminal
illness usually recover from delirium. They may not,
however, regain all their original cognitive abilities,
and may be left with some permanent impairments,
including fatigue, irritability, difficulty concentrating,
or mood changes.
Prevention
Prevention of delirium is focused on treating or
avoiding its underlying causes. The most preventable
forms are those induced by drugs. Strategies for reducing delirium include following prescriptions, consulting the prescribing physician immediately if symptoms
occur, and consulting the physician before discontinuing the drug, even if it has been ineffective; avoiding
intoxication with legal or illegal drugs, and seeking
professional assistance before suddenly discontinuing
an addictive drug such as alcohol or heroin; maintaining good nutrition, which promotes general health and
can minimize the likelihood of delirium from alcohol
intoxication and withdrawal; and avoiding exposure
to solvents, insecticides, heavy metals, or biological
poisons in the home or workplace.