Definition
Diabetes insipidus (DI) is a disorder that causes
the patient to produce tremendous quantities of urine.
The massively increased urine output is usually
accompanied by intense thirst.
Description
The balance of fluid within the body is maintained
through a number of mechanisms. One important
chemical involved in fluid balance is called antidiuretic
hormone (ADH). ADH is produced by the pituitary, a
small gland located at the base of the brain. In a
healthy person and under normal conditions, ADH
is continuously released. ADH influences the amount
of fluid that the kidneys reabsorb into the circulatory
system and the amount of fluid that the kidneys pass
out of the body in the form of urine.
Production of ADH is regulated by the osmolality
of the circulating blood. Osmolality refers to the concentration of dissolved chemicals (such as sodium,
potassium, and chloride; together called solute) circulating in the fluid base of the blood (plasma). When
there is very little fluid compared to the concentration
of solute, the pituitary will increase ADH production.
This tells the kidneys to retain more water and to
decrease the amount of urine produced. As fluid is
retained, the concentration of solute will normalize.
At other times, when the fluid content of the blood is
high in comparison to the concentration of solute,
ADH production will decrease. The kidneys are then
free to pass an increased amount of fluid out of the
body in the urine. Again, this will allow the plasma
osmolality to return to normal.
Diabetes insipidus occurs when either the amount
of ADH produced by the pituitary is below normal
(central DI), or the kidneys’ ability to respond to
ADH is defective (nephrogenic DI). In either case, a
person with DI will pass extraordinarily large quantities of urine, sometimes reaching 10 or more liters each
day. At the same time, the patient’s blood will be very
highly concentrated, with low fluid volume and high
concentrations of solute.
DI occurs on average when a person is about 24
years old, and occurs more frequently in males than in
females.
Causes and symptoms
DI may run in families. The cause of this type of DI
is unknown. Other times, central DI can be caused by:
 an injury to the head
 brain surgery
 cancers that have spread to the pituitary gland (most
commonly occurring with breast cancer)
sarcoidosis (or other related disorders), causing
destruction of the pituitary gland
 any condition or illness that causes decreased oxygen
delivery to the brain
 the use of certain medications that decrease ADH
production (like the antiseizure drug phenytoin)
 the excessive use of alcohol
Central DI may also occur in women who are
pregnant or have just given birth, and in patients
with AIDS who have suffered certain types of
brain infections. Nephrogenic DI sometimes occurs
in patients who are taking the medication lithium,
patients who have high levels of blood calcium, and
patients who are pregnant.
DI is easily confused with an entirely unrelated
disorder, psychogenic polydipsia. Polydipsia refers
to drinking large amounts of water. Psychogenic
polydipsia is a psychiatric problem that makes a
person drink huge quantities of water uncontrollably.
Symptoms of DI include extreme thirst and the
production of tremendous quantities of urine.
Patients with DI typically drink huge amounts of
water, and usually report a specific craving for cold
water. When the amount of water passed in the
urine exceeds the patient’s ability to drink ample
replacement water, the patient may begin to suffer
from symptoms of dehydration. These symptoms
include weakness, fatigue, fever, low blood pressure,
increased heart rate, dizziness, and confusion. If left
untreated, the patient could lapse into unconsciousness and die.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis should be suspected in any patient
with sudden increased thirst and urination.
Laboratory examination of urine will reveal very
dilute urine, made up mostly of water with no
solute. Examination of the blood will reveal very
concentrated blood, high in solute and low in fluid
volume.
A water deprivation test may be performed. This
test requires a patient to stop all fluid intake. The
patient is weighed just before the test begins, and
urine is collected and examined hourly. The test is
stopped when:
 the patient has lost more than 5% of his or her
original body weight
 the patient has reached certain limits of low blood
pressure and increased heart rate
 the urine is no longer changing significantly from
one sample to the next in terms of solute
concentration.
The next step of the test involves injecting a synthetic form of ADH, with one last urine sample examined 60 minutes later. Comparing plasma and urine
osmolality allows the doctor to diagnose either central
DI, nephrogenic DI, partial DI, or psychogenic
polydipsia.
Treatment
A number of medications can be given to
decrease the quantity of fluid passed out into the
urine. These include rasoprassin (Pitressin) injected
and desmopressin acetate (DDAVP) inhaled through
the nose. Other medications that may be given
include some antidiuretic drugs (chlorpropamide,
clofibrate, carbamazepine). Patients with nephrogenic DI, however, will also require special diets
that restrict the amount of solute taken in. These
patients are also treated with a type of medication
called a thiazide diuretic.
Prognosis
Uncomplicated diabetes insipidus is controllable
with adequate intake of water and most patients can
lead normal lives.