Definition
Dialysis treatment replaces the function of the
kidneys, which normally serve as the body’s natural
filtration system. Through the use of a blood filter and
a chemical solution known as dialysate, the treatment
removes waste products and excess fluids from the
bloodstream, while maintaining the proper chemical
balance of the blood. There are two types of dialysis
treatment: hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis.
Purpose
Dialysis can be used in the treatment of patients
suffering from poisoning or overdose, in order to
quickly remove drugs from the bloodstream. Its most
prevalent application, however, is for patients with
temporary or permanent kidney failure. For patients
with end-stage renal disease (ESRD), whose kidneys
are no longer capable of adequately removing fluids
and wastes from their body or of maintaining the
proper level of certain kidney-regulated chemicals in
the bloodstream, dialysis is the only treatment option
available outside of kidney transplantation. In 1996
in the United States, over 200,000 people underwent
regular dialysis treatments to manage their ESRD.
Precautions
Blood pressure changes associated with hemodialysis may pose a risk for patients with heart problems.
Peritoneal dialysis may be the preferred treatment
option in these cases.
Peritoneal dialysis is not recommended for patients
with abdominal adhesions or other abdominal defects,
such as a hernia, that might compromise the efficiency
of the treatment. It is also not recommended for
patients who suffer frequent bouts of diverticulitis, an
inflammation of small pouches in the intestinal tract.
Description
There are two types of dialysis treatment: hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis:
Hemodialysis
Hemodialysis is the most frequently prescribed
type of dialysis treatment in the United States. The
treatment involves circulating the patient’s blood outside of the body through an extracorporeal circuit
(ECC), or dialysis circuit. Two needles are inserted
into the patient’s vein, or access site, and are attached
to the ECC, which consists of plastic blood tubing, a
filter known as a dialyzer (artificial kidney), and a
dialysis machine that monitors and maintains blood
flow and administers dialysate. Dialysate is a chemical
bath that is used to draw waste products out of the
blood.
Since the 1980s, the majority of hemodialysis
treatments in the United States have been performed
with hollow fiber dialyzers. A hollow fiber dialyzer is
composed of thousands of tube-like hollow fiber
strands encased in a clear plastic cylinder several
inches in diameter. There are two compartments
within the dialyzer (the blood compartment and the
dialysate compartment). The membrane that separates these two compartments is semipermeable. This
means that it allows the passage of certain sized molecules across it, but prevents the passage of other, larger
molecules. As blood is pushed through the blood compartment in one direction, suction or vacuum pressure
pulls the dialysate through the dialysate compartment
in a countercurrent, or opposite direction. These
opposing pressures work to drain excess fluids out of
the bloodstream and into the dialysate, a process
called ultrafiltration.
A second process called diffusion moves waste
products in the blood across the membrane into the
dialysate compartment, where they are carried out of
the body. At the same time, electrolytes and other
chemicals in the dialysate solution cross the membrane
into the blood compartment. The purified, chemically
balanced blood is then returned to the body.
Most hemodialysis patients require treatment
three times a week, for an average of three–four
hours per dialysis ‘‘run.’’ Specific treatment schedules depend on the type of dialyzer used and the
patient’s current physical condition. While the treatment prescription and regimen is usually overseen by
a nephrologist (a doctor that specializes in the kidney), dialysis treatments are typically administered
by a nurse or patient care technician in outpatient
clinics known as dialysis centers, or in hospital-based
dialysis units. In-home hemodialysis treatment is also
an option for some patients, although access to this
type of treatment may be limited by financial and
lifestyle factors. An investment in equipment is
required and another person in the household should
be available for support and assistance with
treatments.
Peritoneal dialysis
In peritoneal dialysis, the patient’s peritoneum, or
lining of the abdomen, acts as a blood filter. A catheter
is surgically inserted into the patient’s abdomen.
During treatment, the catheter is used to fill the
abdominal cavity with dialysate. Waste products and
excess fluids move from the patient’s bloodstream into
the dialysate solution. After a waiting period of six to
24 hours, depending on the treatment method used,
the waste-filled dialysate is drained from the abdomen,
and replaced with clean dialysate.
There are three types of peritoneal dialysis:
 Continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis
(CAPD). A continuous treatment that is selfadministered and requires no machine. The patient
inserts fresh dialysate solution into the abdominal
cavity, waits four to six hours, and removes the used
solution. The solution is immediately replaced with
fresh dialysate. A bag attached to the catheter is
worn under clothing.
 Continuous cyclic peritoneal dialysis (CCPD). An
overnight treatment that uses a machine to drain
and refill the abdominal cavity, CCPD takes 10–12
hours per session.
 Intermittent peritoneal dialysis (IPD). This hospitalbased treatment is performed several times a week. A
machine administers and drains the dialysate solution, and sessions can take up to 24 hours.
Peritoneal dialysis is often the treatment option of
choice in infants and children, whose small size can
make vascular (through a vein) access difficult to
maintain. Peritoneal dialysis can also be done outside
of a clinical setting, which is more conducive to regular
school attendance.
Preparation
Patients are weighed immediately before and
after each hemodialysis treatment to assess their
fluid retention. Blood pressure and temperature
are taken and the patient is assessed for physical
changes since their last dialysis run. Regular blood
tests monitor chemical and waste levels in the
blood. Prior to treatment, patients are typically
administered a dose of heparin, an anticoagulant
that prevents blood clotting, to ensure the free flow
of blood through the dialyzer and an uninterrupted
dialysis run for the patient.
Aftercare
Both hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis patients
need to be vigilant about keeping their access sites and
catheters clean and infection-free during and between
dialysis runs.
Dialysis is just one facet of a comprehensive treatment approach for ESRD. Although dialysis treatment is very effective in removing toxins and fluids
from the body, there are several functions of the kidney it cannot mimic, such as regulating high blood
pressure and red blood cell production. Patients with
ESRD need to watch their diet and fluid intake carefully and take medications as prescribed to manage
their disease.
Risks
Many of the risks and side effects associated with
dialysis are a combined result of both the treatment
and the poor physical condition of the ESRD patient.
Dialysis patients should always report side effects to
their healthcare provider.
Anemia
Hematocrit (Hct) levels, a measure of red blood
cells, are typically low in ESRD patients. This deficiency is caused by a lack of the hormone erythropoietin, which is normally produced by the kidneys. The
problem is elevated in hemodialysis patients, who may
incur blood loss during hemodialysis treatments.
Epoetin alfa, or EPO (sold under the trade name
Epogen), a hormone therapy, and intravenous or
oral iron supplements are used to manage anemia in
dialysis patients.
Cramps, nausea, vomiting, and headaches
Some hemodialysis patients experience cramps and
flu-like symptoms during treatment. These can be
caused by a number of factors, including the type of
dialysate used, composition of the dialyzer membrane,
water quality in the dialysis unit, and the ultrafiltration
rate of the treatment. Adjustment of the dialysis prescription often helps alleviate many symptoms.
Hypotension
Because of the stress placed on the cardiovascular
system with regular hemodialysis treatments, patients
are at risk for hypotension, a sudden drop in blood
pressure. This can often be controlled by medication
and adjustment of the patient’s dialysis prescription.
Infection
Both hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis patients
are at risk for infection. Hemodialysis patients should
keep their access sites clean and watch for signs of
redness and warmth that could indicate infection.
Peritoneal dialysis patients must follow the same precautions with their catheter. Peritonitis, an infection of
the peritoneum, causes flu-like symptoms and can
disrupt dialysis treatments if not caught early.
Infectious diseases
Because there is a great deal of blood exposure
involvedin dialysis treatment, a slight risk of contracting
hepatitis B and hepatitis C exists. The hepatitis B vaccination is recommended for most hemodialysis patients.
As of 1997, there had only been one documented case of
HIV being transmitted in a United States dialysis unit to
a staff member, and no documented cases of HIV ever
being transmitted between dialysis patientsin theUnited
States. The strict standards of infection control practiced
in modern hemodialysis units makes the chance of contracting one of these diseases very small.
Normal results
Puffiness in the patient related to edema, or fluid
retention, may be relieved after dialysis treatment. The
patient’s overall sense of physical well-being may also
be improved. Because dialysis is an ongoing treatment
process for many patients, a baseline for normalcy can
be difficult to gauge.