Definition
DiGeorge syndrome (also called 22q11 deletion
syndrome, congenital thymic hypoplasia, or third
and fourth pharyngeal pouch syndrome) is a birth
defect that is caused by an abnormality in chromosome 22 and affects the baby’s immune system. The
disorder is marked by absence or underdevelopment
of the thymus and parathyroid glands. It is named for
Angelo DiGeorge, the pediatrician who first described
it in 1965. Some researchers prefer to call it DiGeorge
anomaly, or DGA, rather than DiGeorge syndrome,
on the grounds that the defects associated with the
disorder represent the failure of a part of the human
embryo to develop normally rather than a collection
of symptoms caused by a single disease.
Description
The prevalence of DiGeorge syndrome is debated;
the estimates range from 1:4000 to 1:6395. Because the
symptoms caused by the chromosomal abnormality
vary somewhat from patient to patient, the syndrome
probably occurs much more often than was previously
thought. DiGeorge syndrome is sometimes described
as one of the ‘‘CATCH 22’’ disorders, so named
because of their characteristics—cardiac defects,
abnormal facial features, thymus underdevelopment,
cleft palate, and hypocalcemia—caused by a deletion
of several genes in chromosome 22. The specific facial
features associated with DiGeorge syndrome include
low-set ears, wide-set eyes, a small jaw, and a short
groove in the upper lip. The male/female ratio is 1:1.
The syndrome appears to be equally common in all
racial and ethnic groups.
Causes and symptoms
DiGeorge syndrome is caused either by inheritance of a defective chromosome 22 or by a new defect
in chromosome 22 in the fetus. The type of defect that
is involved is called deletion. A deletion occurs when
the genetic material in the chromosomes does not
recombine properly during the formation of sperm or
egg cells. The deletion means that several genes from
chromosome 22 are missing in DiGeorge syndrome
patients. Although efforts have been made in the
early 2000s to identify individual candidate genes for
DGA, it appears that a combination of several genes in
the deleted area is responsible for the disorder. Detailed
genetic mapping of chromosome 22 has, however, identified a so-called DiGeorge critical region (DGCR),
which has been completely sequenced.
According to a 1999 study, 6% of children with
DiGeorge syndrome inherited the deletion from a
parent, while 94% had a new deletion. Other conditions that are associated with DiGeorge syndrome are
diabetes (a condition where the pancreas no longer
produces enough insulin) in the mother and fetal alcohol syndrome (a pattern of birth defects, and learning
and behavioral problems affecting individuals whose
mothers consumed alcohol during pregnancy). Other
chromosomal abnormalities that have been found in
patients diagnosed with DGA include deletions on
chromosomes 10p13, 17p13, and 18q21.
The loss of the genes in the deleted material means
that the baby’s third and fourth pharyngeal pouches
fail to develop normally during the twelfth week of
pregnancy. This developmental failure results in a
completely or partially absent thymus gland and parathyroid glands. In addition, 74% of fetuses with
DiGeorge syndrome have severe heart defects. The
child is born with a defective immune system and an
abnormally low level of calcium in the blood. Some
children with DGA are also born with malformations
of the genitals or urinary tract.
These defects usually become apparent within
48 hours of birth. The infant’s heart defects may lead
to heart failure, or there may be seizures and other
evidence of a low level of calcium in the blood
(hypocalcemia) DiGeorge syndrome is also associated with an
increased risk of autoimmune disorders. Cases have
been reported of DGA in association with Graves’
disease, immune thrombocytopenic purpura, juvenile
rheumatoid arthritis, and severe eczema.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of DiGeorge syndrome can be made by
ultrasound examination around the eighteenth week
of pregnancy, when abnormalities in the development
of the heart or the palate can be detected. Another
technique that is used to diagnose the syndrome before
birth is called fluorescence in situ hybridization, or FISH. This technique uses DNA probes from the
DiGeorge region on chromosome 22. FISH can be
performed on cell samples obtained by amniocentesis
as early as the fourteenth week of pregnancy. It confirms about 95% of cases of DiGeorge syndrome.
If the mother has not had prenatal testing, the
diagnosis of DiGeorge syndrome is sometimes suggested by the child’s facial features at birth. In other
cases, the doctor makes the diagnosis during heart
surgery when he or she notices the absence or abnormal location of the thymus gland. The diagnosis can
be confirmed by blood tests for calcium, phosphorus,
and parathyroid hormone levels, and by the sheep cell
test for immune function.
Treatment
Hypocalcemia
Hypocalcemia in DiGeorge patients is unusually
difficult to treat. Infants are usually given calcium and
vitamin D by mouth. Severe cases have been treated by
transplantation of fetal thymus tissue or bone marrow.
Heart defects
Infants with life-threatening heart defects are treated surgically.
Defective immune function
Children with DiGeorge syndrome should be kept
on low-phosphorus diets and kept away from crowds
or other sources of infection. They should not be
immunized with vaccines made from live viruses or
given corticosteroids.
Prognosis
The prognosis is variable; many infants with
DiGeorge syndrome die from overwhelming infection,
seizures, or heart failure within the first year. One
study of a series of 558 patients reported 8% mortality
within six months of birth, with heart defects accounting for all but one of the deaths. Infections resulting
from severe immune deficiency are the second most
common cause of death in patients with DGA.
Advances in heart surgery indicate that the prognosis
is most closely linked to the severity of the heart
defects and the partial presence of the thymus gland.
In most children who survive, the number of T cells, a
type of white blood cell, in the blood rises spontaneously as they mature. Survivors are likely to be
mentally retarded, however, and to have other developmental difficulties, including seizures or other psychiatric and neurological problems in later life.
Prevention
Genetic counseling is recommended for parents of
children with DiGeorge syndrome because the disorder
can be detected prior to birth. Although most children
with DiGeorge syndrome did not inherit the chromosome deletion from their parents, they have a 50%
chance of passing the deletion on to their own children.
Because of the association between DiGeorge syndrome and fetal alcohol syndrome, pregnant women
should avoid drinking alcoholic beverages.