Definition
Dilatation and curettage (D & C) is a gynecological procedure in which the lining of the uterus (endometrium) is scraped away.
Purpose
D & C is commonly used to obtain tissue for
microscopic evaluation to rule out cancer. D & C
may also be used to diagnose and treat heavy menstrual
bleeding, and to diagnose endometrial polyps and
uterine fibroids. A D & C can be used as a treatment
as well, to remove pregnancy tissue after a miscarriage,
incomplete abortion, or childbirth. Endometrial polyps
may be removed, and sometimes benign uterine tumors
(fibroids) may be scraped away. D & C can also be used
as an early abortion technique up to 16 weeks.
Description
D & C is usually performed under general anesthesia, although local or epidural anesthesia can also be
used. A local lessens risk and costs, but the woman will
feel cramping during the procedure. The type of anesthesia used often depends upon the reason for the D & C.
In the procedure (which takes only minutes to
perform), the doctor inserts an instrument to hold
open the vaginal walls, and then stretches the opening
of the uterus to the vagina (the cervix) by inserting a
series of tapering rods, each thicker than the previous
one, or by using other specialized instruments. This
process of opening the cervix is called dilation.
Once the cervix is dilated, the physician inserts a
spoon-shaped surgical device called a curette into the
uterus. The curette is used to scrape away the uterine
lining. One or more small tissue samples from the
lining of the uterus or the cervical canal are sent for
analysis by microscope to check for abnormal cells.
Although simpler, less expensive techniques such
as a vacuum aspiration are quickly replacing the D &
C as a diagnostic method, it is still often used to
diagnose and treat a number of conditions.
Preparation
Because opening the cervix can be painful, sedatives may be given before the procedure begins. Deep
breathing and other relaxation techniques may help
ease cramping during cervical dilation.
Aftercare
A woman who has had a D & C performed in a
hospital can usually go home the same day or the next
day. Many women experience backache and mild
cramps after the procedure, and may pass small
blood clotsfor a day or so. Vaginal staining or bleeding
may continue for several weeks.
Most women can resume normal activities almost
immediately. Patients should avoid sexual intercourse,
douching, and tampon use for at least two weeks to
prevent infection while the cervix is closing and to
allow the endometrium to heal completely.
Risks
The primary risk after the procedure is infection.
Signs of infection include:
 fever
 heavy bleeding
  severe cramps
 foul-smelling vaginal discharge
A woman should report any of these symptoms to
her doctor, who can treat the infection with antibiotics
before it becomes serious.
D & C is a surgical operation, which carries certain risks associated with general anesthesia. Rare
complications include puncture of the uterus (which
usually heals on its own) or puncture of the bowel or
bladder (which require further surgery to repair).
Normal results
Removal of the uterine lining causes no side effects,
and may be beneficial if the lining has thickened somuch
that it causes heavy periods. The uterine lining soon
grows again normally, as part of the menstrual cycle.
