Definition
Diphtheria is a potentially fatal, contagious disease that usually involves the nose, throat, and air
passages, but may also infect the skin. Its most striking
feature is the formation of a grayish membrane covering the tonsils and upper part of the throat.
Description
Like many other upper respiratory diseases,
diphtheria is most likely to break out during the winter
months. At one time it was a major childhood killer,
but it is now rare in developed countries because of
widespread immunization. Since 1988, all confirmed
cases in the United States have involved visitors or
immigrants. In countries that do not have routine
immunization against this infection, the mortality
rate varies from 1.5–25%.
Persons who have not been immunized may get
diphtheria at any age. The disease is spread most often
by droplets from the coughing or sneezing of an
infected person or carrier. The incubation period is
two to seven days, with an average of three days. It is
vital to seek medical help at once when diphtheria
is suspected, because treatment requires emergency
measures for adults as well as children.
Causes and symptoms
The symptoms of diphtheria are caused by toxins
produced by the diphtheria bacillus, Corynebacterium
diphtheriae (from the Greek for ‘‘rubber membrane’’).
In fact, toxin production is related to infections of the
bacillus itself with a particular bacteria virus called a
phage (from bacteriophage; a virus that infects bacteria). The intoxication destroys healthy tissue in the
upper area of the throat around the tonsils, or in open
wounds in the skin. Fluid from the dying cells then
coagulates to form the telltale gray or grayish green
membrane. Inside the membrane, the bacteria produce
an exotoxin, which is a poisonous secretion that causes
the life-threatening symptoms of diphtheria. The exotoxin is carried throughout the body in the bloodstream, destroying healthy tissue in other parts of the
body.
The most serious complications caused by the
exotoxin are inflammations of the heart muscle (myocarditis) and damage to the nervous system. The risk
of serious complications is increased as the time
between onset of symptoms and the administration
of antitoxin increases, and as the size of the membrane
formed increases. The myocarditis may cause disturbances in the heart rhythm and may culminate in heart
failure. The symptoms of nervous system involvement
can include seeing double (diplopia), painful or difficult swallowing, and slurred speech or loss of voice,
which are all indications of the exotoxin’s effect on
nerve functions. The exotoxin may also cause severe
swelling in the neck (‘‘bull neck’’).
The signs and symptoms of diphtheria vary
according to the location of the infection:
Nasal
Nasal diphtheria produces few symptoms other
than a watery or bloody discharge. On examination,
there may be a small visible membrane in the nasal
passages. Nasal infection rarely causes complications
by itself, but it is a public health problem because it
spreads the disease more rapidly than other forms of
diphtheria.
Pharyngeal
Pharyngeal diphtheria gets its name from the
pharynx, which is the part of the upper throat that
connects the mouth and nasal passages with the voice
box. This is the most common form of diphtheria,
causing the characteristic throat membrane. The
membrane often bleeds if it is scraped or cut. It is
important not to try to remove the membrane because
the trauma may increase the body’s absorption of
the exotoxin. Other signs and symptoms of pharyngeal
diphtheria include mild sore throat, fever of
101–102 8F (38.3–38.9 8C), a rapid pulse, and general
body weakness.
Laryngeal
Laryngeal diphtheria, which involves the voice
box or larynx, is the form most likely to produce
serious complications. The fever is usually higher in
this form of diphtheria (103–104 8F or 39.4–40 8C)
and the patient is very weak. Patients may have a
severe cough, have difficulty breathing, or lose their
voice completely. The development of a ‘‘bull neck’’
indicates a high level of exotoxin in the bloodstream.
Obstruction of the airway may result in respiratory
compromise and death.
Skin
This form of diphtheria, which is sometimes called
cutaneous diphtheria, accounts for about 33% of
diphtheria cases. It is found chiefly among people
with poor hygiene. Any break in the skin can become
infected with diphtheria. The infected tissue develops
an ulcerated area and a diphtheria membrane may
form over the wound but is not always present. The
wound or ulcer is slow to heal and may be numb or
insensitive when touched.
Diagnosis
Because diphtheria must be treated as quickly as
possible, doctors usually make the diagnosis on the
basis of the visible symptoms without waiting for test
results.
In making the diagnosis, the doctor examines the
patient’s eyes, ears, nose, and throat in order to rule
out other diseases that may cause fever and sore
throat, such as infectious mononucleosis, a sinus infection, or strep throat. The most important single symptom that suggests diphtheria is the membrane. When a
patient develops skin infections during an outbreak of
diphtheria, the doctor will consider the possibility of
cutaneous diphtheria and take a smear to confirm the
diagnosis.
Laboratory tests
The diagnosis of diphtheria can be confirmed by
the results of a culture obtained from the infected area.
Material from the swab is put on a microscope slide
and stained using a procedure called Gram’s stain. The
diphtheria bacillus is called Gram-positive because it
holds the dye after the slide is rinsed with alcohol.
Under the microscope, diphtheria bacilli look like
beaded rod-shaped cells, grouped in patterns that
resemble Chinese characters. Another laboratory test
involves growing the diphtheria bacillus on a special
material called Loeffler’s medium.
Treatment
Diphtheria is a serious disease requiring hospital
treatment in an intensive care unit if the patient has
developed respiratory symptoms. Treatment includes
a combination of medications and supportive care:
Antitoxin
The most important step is prompt administration of diphtheria antitoxin, without waiting for
laboratory results. The antitoxin is made from horse
serum and works by neutralizing any circulating exotoxin. The doctor must first test the patient for sensitivity to animal serum. Patients who are sensitive
(about 10%) must be desensitized with diluted antitoxin, since the antitoxin is the only specific substance
that will counteract diphtheria exotoxin. No human
antitoxin is available for the treatment of diphtheria.
The dose ranges from 20,000–100,000 units,
depending on the severity and length of time of symptoms occurring before treatment. Diphtheria antitoxin
is usually given intravenously.
Antibiotics
Antibiotics are given to wipe out the bacteria, to
prevent the spread of the disease, and to protect the
patient from developing pneumonia. They are not a
substitute for treatment with antitoxin. Both adults
and children may be given penicillin, ampicillin, or
erythromycin. Erythromycin appears to be more effective than penicillin in treating people who are carriers
because of better penetration into the infected area.
Cutaneous diphtheria is usually treated by cleansing the wound thoroughly with soap and water, and
giving the patient antibiotics for 10 days.
Supportive care
Diphtheria patients need bed rest with intensive
nursing care, including extra fluids, oxygenation, and
monitoring for possible heart problems, airway blockage, or involvement of the nervous system. Patients
with laryngeal diphtheria are kept in a croup tent or
high-humidity environment; they may also need
throat suctioning or emergency surgery if their airway
is blocked.
Patients recovering from diphtheria should rest at
home for a minimum of two to three weeks, especially if
they have heart complications. In addition, patients
should be immunized against diphtheria after recovery,
because having the disease does not always induce antitoxin formation and protect them from reinfection.
Prevention of complications
Diphtheria patients who develop myocarditis may
be treated with oxygen and with medications to prevent irregular heart rhythms. An artificial pacemaker
may be needed. Patients with difficulty swallowing can
be fed through a tube inserted into the stomach
through the nose. Patients who cannot breathe are
usually put on mechanical respirators.
Prognosis
The prognosis depends on the size and location of
the membrane and on early treatment with antitoxin;
the longer the delay, the higher the death rate. The
most vulnerable patients are children under age 15 and
those who develop pneumonia or myocarditis. Nasal
and cutaneous diphtheria are rarely fatal.
Prevention
Prevention of diphtheria has four aspects:
Immunization
Universal immunization is the most effective
means of preventing diphtheria. The standard course
of immunization for healthy children is three doses of
DPT (diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis) preparation given
between two months and six months of age, with
booster doses given at 18 months and at entry into
school. Adults should be immunized at 10 year intervals with Td (tetanus-diphtheria) toxoid. A toxoid is a
bacterial toxin that is treated to make it harmless but
still can induce immunity to the disease.
Isolation of patients
Diphtheria patients must be isolated for one to
seven days or until two successive cultures show that
they are no longer contagious. Children placed in isolation are usually assigned a primary nurse for emotional support.
Identification and treatment of contacts
Because diphtheria is highly contagious and has a
short incubation period, family members and other
contacts of diphtheria patients must be watched for
symptoms and tested to see if they are carriers. They
are usually given antibiotics for seven days and a
booster shot of diphtheria/tetanus toxoid.
Reporting cases to public health authorities
Reporting is necessary to track potential epidemics, to help doctors identify the specific strain of
diphtheria, and to see if resistance to penicillin or
erythromycin has developed.