Definition
One of the most common types of back surgery is
disk removal (diskectomy), the removal of an intervertebral disk, the flexible plate that connects any two
adjacent vertebrae in the spine. Intervertebral disks act
as shock absorbers, protecting the brain and spinal cord
from the impact produced by the body’s movements.
Purpose
About 150,000 Americans undergo disk removal
each year in the United States. Removing the invertebral disk is performed to treat back pain that has
lasted at least six weeks as a result of an abnormal disk
and that has not responded to conservative treatment.
Surgery is also performed if there is pressure on the
lumbosacral nerve roots that causes weakness or
bowel or bladder disfunction.
As a person ages, the disks between the vertebrae
degenerate and dry out, and the fibers holding them in
place tear. Eventually, the disk can form a blister-like
bulge, compressing nerves in the spine and causing pain.
This is called a ‘‘prolapsed’’ (or herniated) disk. If such
a disk causes muscle weakness or interferes with bladder
or bowel function because it is pressing on a nerve root,
immediate surgery to remove the disk may be needed.
The aim of the surgery is to try to relieve all
pressure on nerve roots by removing the pulpy material from the disk, or the disk itself. If it is necessary to
remove material from several nearby vertebrae, the
spine may become unsteady. In this case, the surgeon
will perform a spinal fusion, removing all the disks
between two or more vertebrae and roughening the
bones so that the vertebrae heal together. Bone strips
taken from the patient’s leg or hip may be used to help
hold the vertebrae together. Spinal fusion decreases
pain but it also decreases spinal mobility.
Precautions
The doctor will obtain x rays, neuroimaging studies, including computed tomography scan (CT scan)
myelogram and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),
and clinical exams to determine the precise location
of the affected disk.
Description
The surgery is done under general anaesthesia,
which puts the patient to sleep and affects the whole
body. Operating on the patient’s back, the neurosurgeon or orthopedic surgeon makes an opening
into the vertebral canal, and then moves the dura and
the bundle of nerves called the ‘‘cauda equina’’ (horse’s
tail) aside, which exposes the disk. If a portion of the
disk has moved from between the vertebrae out into the
nerve canal, it is simply removed. If the disk itself has
become fragmented and partially displaced, or not
fragmented but bulging extensively, the surgeon will
remove the bulging or displaced part of the disk and
the part that lies in the space between the vertebrae.
Preparation
The patient is given an injection an hour before
the surgery to dry up internal fluids and encourage
drowsiness.
Aftercare
After the operation, the patient will awaken lying
flat and face down, and must remain this way for
several days, changing position only to avoid bedsores. There maybe slight pain or stiffness in the
back area.
Patients should sleep on a firm mattress and avoid
bending at the waist, lifting heavy weights, or sitting in
one spot for a long time (such as riding in a car).
After surgery, patients can usually leave the hospital on the fourth or fifth day. They must:
 avoid sitting for more than 15–20 minutes
 use a reclined chair
 avoid bending, twisting, or lifting
 begin gentle walking (indoors or outdoors), gradually increasing
 begin stationary biking or gentle swimming after two
weeks
 continue exercise for the next four weeks
 slow down if they experience more than minor pain
in the back or leg
Risks
All surgery carries some risk due to heart and lung
problems or the anesthesia itself, but this risk is
generally extremely small. (The risk of death from
general anesthesia for all types of surgery, for example, is only about 1 in 1,600.)
The most common risk of the surgery is infection,
which occurs in 1–2% of cases. Rarely, the surgery can
damage nerves in the lower back or major blood vessels in front of the disk. Occasionally, there may be
some residual paralysis of a particular leg or bladder
muscle after surgery, but this is the result of the disk
problem that necessitated the surgery, not the operation itself.
While disk removals can relieve pain in 90% of
cases, there are some people who do not get pain relief,
depending on how long they had the condition requiring surgery and other factors.
Normal results
After about five days, most patients can leave the
hospital. They can resume all normal activities, including work, after four to six weeks of recuperation at
home.
In properly evaluated patients, there is a very
good chance that disk removal will be successful in
easing pain. Even in patients over age 60, disk surgery
has a ‘‘good to excellent’’ result for 87% of patients.
Disk surgery can relieve both back and leg pain, but
the greatest pain relief will occur with the leg pain.