Definition
In medicine, the terms dislocation and subluxation refer to the displacement of bones that form a
joint. These conditions affecting the joint most often
result from trauma that causes adjoining bones to no
longer align with each other. A partial or incomplete
dislocation is called a subluxation.
Description
In a healthy joint, the bones are normally held
together with tough, fibrous bands called ligaments.
These ligaments are attached to each bone along with
a fibrous sac surrounding the joint called the articular
capsule or joint capsule. The ligaments and joint capsule
are relatively strong and nonelastic but permit movement within normal limits for each particular joint. In
the event of a dislocation, one of the bones making up
the joint is forced out of its natural alignment from
excessive stretching and tearing of the joint ligaments
and capsule. Muscles and tendons surrounding the joint
are usually stretched and injured to some degree.
Causes and symptoms
A violent movement at the joint that exceeds normal limits usually causes a joint dislocation. Although
dislocations often result from trauma, they sometimes
occur as a result of disease affecting the joint structures.
In the process of the dislocation, there is tearing of the
ligaments and the articular capsule, which are vital
structures for connecting the bone. Following a dislocation, the bones affected are often immobile and the
affected limb may be locked in an abnormal position;
fractures are also a concern with severe dislocations.
Important factors in recognizing a dislocation or
subluxation include a history of experiencing a fall or
receiving a blow in a particular joint followed by the
sudden onset of loss of function to the involved limb.
Immediately after the dislocation, the joint almost
always swells significantly and feels painful when pressure is applied (point tenderness). If trauma to the
joint causing the dislocation or subluxation is violent
in nature, small chips of bone can be torn away with
the supporting structures. Chronic recurrent dislocations may take place without severe pain because of
the somewhat slack condition of the surrounding muscles and other supporting tissues. A first-time dislocation is considered and treated as a possible fracture.
Risk factors that can increase susceptibility of joint
dislocation and subluxation are shallow or abnormally formed joint surfaces present at birth (congenital) and/or other diseases of ligaments and tissue
around a joint. Some infants are born with a hip dislocation. Both sexes and all ages are affected.
Diagnosis
A thorough medical history and physical exam by a
physician is the first step in the correct diagnosis of
dislocations and subluxations. X rays of the joint and
adjacent bones can locate and help determine the extent
of dislocated joints.
Treatment
Immediately after the dislocation, the application
of ice is helpful to control swelling and decrease pain.
If the patient needs to be transported, it is important to
prevent the joint from moving (immobilization). At
times, a cast or splint may be used to immobilize the
joint and ensure proper alignment and healing. The
treatment of realigning bones following a dislocation
is called reduction. This may include simple maneuvers that manipulate the joint to reposition the bones
or surgical procedures to restore the joint to its normal
position. A general anesthesia or muscle relaxant may
be used to help make joint reduction possible by relaxing surrounding muscles in spasm. Acetaminophen or
aspirin are sometimes used to control moderate pain,
and narcotics may be prescribed by the physician if the
pain is severe. Recurring dislocation may require surgical reconstruction or replacement of the joint. It is
not recommended to attempt to reset a dislocated joint
outside of a medical environment with experienced
medical personnel, because a fracture may be present.
Alternative treatment
Chiropractic care has been shown to be effective
for joint subluxation and dislocation, especially in the
spine. Swelling can be addressed using botanical therapies. Bromelain, a pineapple enzyme, and turmeric
(Curcuma longa) are the most potent botanical remedies for this purpose. Acute homeopathic care with
arnica (Arnica montana) can reduce the trauma to the
body. Ligament and tendon strengthening can be
assisted both botanically and homeopathically.
Prognosis
Joint ligaments have poor blood supply and,
therefore, heal slowly. This healing process continues
long after the symptoms of the dislocation injury have
diminished. Once a joint has been either subluxated or
completely dislocated, the connective tissue binding or
holding it in correct alignment is stretched to such an
extent that the joint becomes extremely vulnerable to
repeated dislocations. However, this chance of recurrent dislocation and subluxation will decrease if a
proper rehabilitation program is implemented to
strengthen surrounding muscles of the joint. Most
joint dislocations are curable with prompt treatment.
After the dislocation has been corrected, the joint may
require immobilization with a cast or sling for two to
eight weeks.
Prevention
When an individual is involved in strenuous
sports or heavy work, involved joints may be protected by elastic bandage wraps, tape wraps, knee
and shoulder pads, or special support stockings.
Keeping the muscles surrounding the joint strong
will also help prevent dislocations. Long-term problems may also be prevented by allowing an adequate amount of time for an injured joint to rest and heal
prior to resuming full activity.