Definition
The dissociative disorders are a group of mental
disorders that affect consciousness defined as causing significant interference with the patient’s general
functioning, including social relationships and
employment.
Description
In order to have a clear picture of these disorders,
dissociation should first be understood. Dissociation
is a mechanism that allows the mind to separate or
compartmentalize certain memories or thoughts from
normal consciousness. These split-off mental contents
are not erased. They may resurface spontaneously or
be triggered by objects or events in the person’s
environment.
Dissociation is a process that occurs along a spectrum of severity. It does not necessarily mean that a
person has a dissociative disorder or othermentalillness.
A mild degree of dissociation occurs with some physical
stressors; people who have gone without sleep for a long
period of time, have had ‘‘laughing gas’’ for dental surgery, or have been in a minor accident often have brief
dissociative experiences. Another commonplace example of dissociation is a person becoming involved in a
book or movie so completely that the surroundings or
the passage of time are not noticed. Another example
might be driving on the highway and taking several exits
without noticing or remembering.Dissociationis related
to hypnosis in that hypnotic trance also involves a temporarily altered state of consciousness. Most patients
with dissociative disorders are highly hypnotizable.
People in other cultures sometimes have dissociative experiences in the course of religious (in certain
trance states) or other group activities. These occurrences should not be judged in terms of what is considered ‘‘normal’’ in the United States.
Moderate or severe forms of dissociation are
caused by such traumatic experiences as childhood
abuse, combat, criminal attacks, brainwashing in hostage situations, or involvement in a natural or transportation disaster. Patients with acute stress disorder,
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), or conversion
disorder and somatization disorder may develop dissociative symptoms. Recent studies of trauma indicate
that the human brain stores traumatic memories in a
different way than normal memories. Traumatic memories are not processed or integrated into a person’s
ongoing life in the same fashion as normal memories.
Instead they are dissociated, or ‘‘split off,’’ and may
erupt into consciousness from time to time without
warning. The affected person cannot control or ‘‘edit’’
these memories. Over a period of time, these two sets of
memories, the normal and the traumatic, may coexist as
parallel sets without being combined or blended. In
extreme cases, different sets of dissociated memories
may alter subpersonalities of patients with dissociative
identity disorder (multiple personality disorder).
The dissociative disorders vary in their severity and
the suddenness of onset. It is difficult to give statistics
for their frequency in the United States because they are
a relatively new category and are often misdiagnosed.
Criteria for diagnosis require significant impairment
in social or vocational functioning.
Dissociative amnesia
Dissociative amnesia is a disorder in which the
distinctive feature is the patient’s inability to remember important personal information to a degree
that cannot be explained by normal forgetfulness. In
many cases, it is a reaction to a traumatic accident or
witnessing a violent crime. Patients with dissociative
amnesia may develop depersonalization or trance
states as part of the disorder, but they do not experience a change in identity.
Dissociative fugue
Dissociative fugue is a disorder in which a person
temporarily loses his or her sense of personal identity
and travels to another location where he or she may
assume a new identity. Again, this condition usually
follows a major stressor or trauma. Apart from inability to recall their past or personal information,
patients with dissociative fugue do not behave strangely or appear disturbed to others. Cases of dissociative fugue are more common in wartime or in
communities disrupted by a natural disaster.
Depersonalization disorder
Depersonalization disorder is a disturbance in
which the patient’s primary symptom is a sense of
detachment from the self. Depersonalization as a symptom (not as a disorder) is quite common in college-age
populations. It is often associated with sleep deprivation or ‘‘recreational’’ drug use. It may be accompanied
by ‘‘derealization’’ (where objects in an environment
appear altered). Patients sometimes describe
depersonalization as feeling like a robot or watching
themselves from the outside. Depersonalization disorder may also involve feelings of numbness or loss of
emotional ‘‘aliveness.’’
Dissociative identity disorder (DID)
Dissociative identity disorder (DID) is the newer
name for multiple personality disorder (MPD). DID is
considered the most severe dissociative disorder and
involves all of the major dissociative symptoms.
Dissociative disorder not otherwise specified
(DDNOS)
DDNOS is a diagnostic category ascribed to
patients with dissociative symptoms that do not meet
the full criteria for a specific dissociative disorder.
Causes and symptoms
The moderate to severe dissociation that occurs in
patients with dissociative disorders is understood to
result from a set of causes:
 an innate ability to dissociate easily
 repeated episodes of severe physical or sexual abuse
in childhood
 the lack of a supportive or comforting person to
counteract abusive relative(s)
 the influence of other relatives with dissociative
symptoms or disorders
The relationship of dissociative disorders to childhood abuse has led to intense controversy and lawsuits
concerning the accuracy of childhood memories. The
brain’s storage, retrieval, and interpretation of memories are still not fully understood. Controversy also
exists regarding how much individuals presenting dissociative disorders have been influenced by books and
movies to describe a certain set of symptoms
(scripting).
The major dissociative symptoms are:
Amnesia
Amnesia in a dissociative disorder is marked by
gaps in a patient’s memory for long periods of time or
for traumatic events. Doctors can distinguish this type
of amnesia from loss of memory caused by head injuries or drug intoxication, because the amnesia is
‘‘spotty’’ and related to highly charged events and
feelings.
Depersonalization
Depersonalization is a dissociative symptom in
which the patient feels that his or her body is unreal,
is changing, or is dissolving. Some patients experience
depersonalization as being outside their bodies or
watching a movie of themselves.
Derealization
Derealization is a dissociative symptom in which
the external environment is perceived as unreal. The
patient may see walls, buildings, or other objects as
changing in shape, size, or color. In some cases, the
patient may feel that other persons are machines or
robots, though the patient is able to acknowledge the
unreality of this feeling.
Identity disturbances
Patients with dissociative fugue, DDNOS, or DID
often experience confusion about their identities or
even assume new identities. Identity disturbances
result from the patient having split off entire personality traits or characteristics as well as memories.
When a stressful or traumatic experience triggers the
reemergence of these dissociated parts, the patient
may act differently, answer to a different name, or
appear confused by his or her surroundings.
Diagnosis
When a doctor is evaluating a patient with dissociative symptoms, he or she will first rule out physical
conditions that sometimes produce amnesia, depersonalization, or derealization. These physical conditions
include epilepsy, head injuries, brain disease, side
effects of medications, substance abuse, intoxication,
AIDS, dementia complex, or recent periods of extreme
physical stress and sleeplessness. In some cases, the
doctor may give the patient an electroencephalogram
(EEG) to exclude epilepsy or other seizure disorders.
If the patient appears to be physically normal, the
doctor will rule out psychotic disturbances, including
schizophrenia. In addition, doctors can use some psychological tests to narrow the diagnosis. One is a screener,
the Dissociative Experiences Scale (DES). If the patient
has a high score on this test, he or she can be evaluated
further with the Dissociative Disorders Interview
Schedule (DDIS) or the Structured Clinical Interview
for DSM-IV Dissociative Disorders (SCID-D). It is also
possible for doctors to measure a patient’s hypnotizability as part of a diagnostic evaluation.
Treatment
Treatment of the dissociative disorders often combines several methods.
Psychotherapy
Patients with dissociative disorders often require
treatment by a therapist with some specialized understanding of dissociation.This backgroundis particularly
important if the patient’s symptoms include identity
problems. Many patients with dissociative disorders
are helped by group as well as individual treatment.
Medications
Some doctors will prescribe tranquilizers or antidepressants for the anxiety and/or depression that often
accompany dissociative disorders. Patients with dissociative disorders are, however, at risk for abusing or
becoming dependent on medications. As of 2001, there
is no drug that can reliably counteract dissociation itself.
Hypnosis
Hypnosis is frequently recommended as a method
of treatment for dissociative disorders, partly because
hypnosis is related to the process of dissociation.
Hypnosis may help patients recover repressed ideas
and memories. Therapists treating patients with DID
sometimes use hypnosis in the process of ‘‘fusing’’ the
patient’s alternate personalities.
Prognosis
Prognoses for dissociative disorders vary. Recovery
from dissociative fugue is usually rapid. Dissociative
amnesia may resolve quickly, but can become a chronic
disorder in some patients. Depersonalization disorder,
DDNOS, and DID are usually chronic conditions. DID
usually requires five or more years of treatment for
recovery.
Prevention
Since the primary cause of dissociative disorders is
thought to involve extended periods of humanly
inflicted trauma, prevention depends on the
elimination of child abuse and psychological abuse of
adult prisoners or hostages.