Definition
Diverticulosis refers to a condition in which
the inner, lining layer of the large intestine (colon)
bulges out (herniates) through the outer, muscular
layer. These outpouchings are called diverticula.
Diverticulitis refers to the development of inflammation and infection in one or more diverticula.
Description
Diverticula tend to occur most frequently in the
last segment of the large intestine, the sigmoid colon.
They occur with decreasing frequency as one examines
further back toward the beginning of the large intestine. The chance of developing diverticula increases
with age, so that by the age of 50, about 20–50% of
all people will have some diverticula. By the age of 90,
virtually everyone will have developed some diverticula. Most diverticula measure about 3 mm to just
over 3 cm in diameter. Larger diverticula, termed
giant diverticula, are quite infrequent, but may measure as large as 15 cm in diameter.
Causes and symptoms
Diverticula are believed to be caused by overly
forceful contractions of the muscular wall of the
large intestine. As areas of this wall spasm, they
become weaker and weaker, allowing the inner lining
to bulge through. The anatomically weakest areas of
the intestinal wall occur next to blood vessels which
course through the wall, so diverticula commonly
occur in this location.
Diverticula are most common in the developed
countries of the West (North America, Great Britain,
northern and western Europe). This is thought to be due
to the diet of these countries, which tends to be quite low
in fiber. A diet low in fiber results in the production of
smaller volumes of stool. In order to move this smaller
stool along the colon and out of the rectum, the colon
must narrow itself significantly, and does so by contracting down forcefully. This causes an increase in pressure,
which, over time, weakens the muscular wall of the
intestine and allows diverticular pockets to develop.
The origin of giant diverticula development is not
completely understood, although one theory involves
gas repeatedly entering and becoming trapped in an
already-existing diverticulum, causing stretching and
expansion of that diverticulum.
The great majority of people with diverticulosis
will remain symptom-free. Many diverticula are quite
accidentally discovered during examinations for other
conditions of the intestinal tract.
Some people with diverticulosis have symptoms
such as constipation, cramping, and bloating. It is
unclear whether these symptoms are actually caused
by the diverticula themselves, or whether some other
gastrointestinal condition (such as irritable bowel syndrome) might be responsible. A complication of diverticulosis occurs because many diverticula develop in
areas very near blood vessels. Therefore, one serious
risk of diverticulosis involves bleeding. Although an
infrequent complication, the bleeding can be quite
severe. Seventy-five percent of such bleeding episodes
occur due to diverticula located on the right side of the
colon. About 50% of the time, such bleeding will stop
on its own.
One of the most common and potentially serious
complications of diverticulosis is inflammation and
infection of a particular diverticulum, called
diverticulitis.
Diverticulitis is three times more likely to occur in
the left side of the large intestine. Since most diverticula are located in the sigmoid colon (the final segment
of the large intestine which empties into the rectum),
most diverticulitis also takes place in the sigmoid. The
elderly have the most serious complications from
diverticulitis, although very severe infections can also
occur in patients under the age of 50. Men are three
times as likely as women to be stricken with
diverticulitis.
Diverticulitis is believed to occur when a hardened
piece of stool, undigested food, and bacteria (called a
fecalith) becomes lodged in a diverticulum. This
blockage interferes with the blood supply to the area,
and infection sets in.
An individual with diverticulitis will experience
pain (especially in the lower left side of the abdomen)
and fever. In response to the infection and the irritation of nearby tissues within the abdomen, the abdominal muscles may begin to spasm. About 25% of all
patients with diverticulitis will have some rectal bleeding, although this rarely becomes severe. Walled-off
pockets of infection, called abscesses, may appear
within the wall of the intestine, or even on the exterior
surface of the intestine. When a diverticulum weakens
sufficiently, and is filled to bulging with infected pus, a
perforation in the intestinal wall may develop. When
the infected contents of the intestine spill out into the
abdomen, the severe infection called peritonitis may
occur. Peritonitis is an infection and inflammation of
the lining of the abdominal cavity, the peritoneum.
Other complications of diverticulitis include the
formation of abnormal connections between two
organs that normally do not connect (fistulas; for
example, the intestine and the bladder), and scarring
outside of the intestine which squeezes off a portion of
the intestine, obstructing it.
Diagnosis
As mentioned, the majority of diverticula do not
cause any symptoms, and are often found by coincidence during an examination being performed for
some other medical condition.
When diverticula are suspected because a patient
begins to have sudden rectal bleeding, the location of
the bleeding can be studied by performing an angiography. Angiography involves inserting a tiny tube
through an artery in the leg, and moving it up into
one of the major arteries of the gastrointestinal system. A particular chemical (contrast medium) which
will show up on x-ray films is injected, and the area of
bleeding is located by looking for an area where the
contrast is leaking into the interior (lumen) of the
intestine.
A procedure called endoscopy provides another
method for examining the colon and locating the site
of bleeding. In endoscopy, a small, flexible scope
(endoscope) is inserted through the rectum and into
the intestine. The scope usually bears a fiber-optic
camera, which allows the view through this endoscope
to be projected onto a television screen. The operator
can introduce the endoscope further and further
through the intestine to find the location of the
bleeding.
Diagnosis of diverticulitis is not difficult in
patients with previously diagnosed diverticulosis.
The presence of abdominal pain and fever in such an
individual would make the suspicion of diverticulitis
quite high. Examination of the abdomen will usually
reveal tenderness to touch, with the patient’s abdominal muscles contracting strongly to protect the tender
area. During a rectal exam (performed by inserting a
finger into the rectum), a doctor may be able to feel
an abnormal mass. Touching this mass may prove
painful to the patient.
When a practitioner is suspicious of diverticulitis
as the cause for the patient’s symptoms, he or she will
most likely avoid the types of tests usually used
to diagnose gastrointestinal disorders. These include
barium enema and endoscopy. The concern is that the
increased pressure exerted on the intestine during
these exams may increase the likelihood of intestinal
perforation. After medical treatment for the diverticulitis, these examinations may be performed in order to
learn the extent of the patient’s disease.
Treatment
Only about 20% of patients with diverticulosis
ever have symptoms which lead them to seek medical
help. Most people never know that they have diverticula. For those individuals who have cramping pain
and constipation believed to be due to diverticulosis,
the usual prescription involves increasing the fiber in
the diet. This can be done by adding special diet supplements of bran or psyllium seed, which increase
stool volume. Bleeding diverticula can usually be treated by bed rest, with blood transfusion needed for more
severe bleeding (hemorrhaging). In cases of very heavy
hemorrhaging, medications which encourage clotting
can be injected during the course of a diagnostic
angiography.
While there are almost no situations when uncomplicated diverticulosis requires surgery, giant diverticula always require removal. This is due to the very
high chance of infection and perforation of these
diverticula. When giant diverticula are diagnosed,
the usual treatment involves removing that portion
of the intestine.
Treatment for uncomplicated diverticulitis
usually requires hospitalization. ‘‘Resting the bowel’’
is a mainstay of treatment, and involves keeping the
patient from eating or sometimes even drinking anything by mouth. Therefore, the patient will need to
receive fluids through a needle in the vein (intravenous
or IV fluids). Antibiotics will also be administered
through the IV. Some physicians will agree to try
treatment at home for very mildly ill patients. These
patients will be put on a liquid diet and receive oral
antibiotics.
The various complications of diverticulitis need to
be treated aggressively, because the death rate from
such things as perforation and peritonitis is quite high.
Abscesses can be drained of their infected contents by
inserting a needle through the skin of the abdomen
and into the abscess. When this is unsuccessful, open
abdominal surgery will be required to remove the piece
of the intestine containing the abscess. Fistulas require
surgical repair, including the removal of the length of
intestine containing the origin of the fistula, followed
by immediate reconnection of the two free ends of
intestine. Peritonitis requires open surgery. The entire
abdominal cavity is cleaned by being irrigated
(washed) with a warmed sterile saltwater solution,
and the damaged piece of intestine is removed.
Obstructions require immediate surgery to prevent
perforation. Massive, uncontrollable bleeding, while
rare, may require removal of part or all of the large
intestine.
During any of these types of operations, the surgeon must make an important decision regarding the
quantity of intestine which must be removed. When the
amount of intestine removed is great, it may be necessary to perform a colostomy. A colostomy involves pulling the end of the remaining intestine through the
abdominal wall, to the outside. This bit of intestine is
then fashioned so that a bag can be fit over it. The
patient’s waste (feces) collect in the bag, because the
intestine no longer connects with the rectum. This
colostomy may be temporary, in which case another
operation will be required to reconnect the intestine,
after some months of substantial healing has occurred.
Other times, the colostomy will need to be permanent,
and the patient will have to adjust to living permanently
with the colostomy bag. Most people with colostomies
are able to go on with a very active life.
Occasionally, a patient will have such severe
diverticular disease that a surgeon recommends planning ahead, and schedules removal of a portion of the
colon. This is done to avoid the high risk of surgery
performed after a complication has set in. Certain
developments in a patient will identify those patients
who are at very high risk of experiencing dangerous
complications. Such elective surgery may be
recommended:
 when an older individual has had several attacks of
diverticulitis
 when someone under the age of 50 has had even one
attack
 when treatment does not get rid of a painful mass
 when the intestine appears to be narrowing on x-ray
examination (this could suggest the presence of
cancer)
 when certain patients begin to regularly experience
painful urination or urinary infections (this suggests
that there may be a connection between the intestine
and the bladder)
 when there is any question of cancer
 when the diverticular disease appears to be progressing rapidly
Prognosis
The prognosis for people with diverticula is excellent, with only 20% of such patients ever seeking any
medical help for their condition.
While diverticulitis can be a difficult and painful
disease, it is usually quite treatable. Prognosis is worse
for individuals who have other medical problems,
particularly those requiring the use of steroid medications, which increase the chances of developing a
serious infection. Prognosis is also worse in the elderly.Prevention
While there is no absolutely certain way to prevent
the development of diverticula, it is believed that highfiber diets are of help. Foods that are recommended
for their high fiber content include whole grain breads
and cereals, and all types of fruits and vegetables.
Most experts suggest that individuals take in about
0.71–1.23 oz (20–35) gs of fiber daily. If this is not
possible to achieve through a person’s diet, there are
fiber products which can be mixed into 8 oz (237l)
of water or juice, and which provide about 0.13–19
oz (4–6 gs) of fiber.