Definition
Doppler ultrasonography is a non-invasive diagnostic procedure that changes sound waves into an
image that can be viewed on a monitor.
Purpose
Doppler ultrasonography can detect the direction,
velocity, and turbulence of blood flow. It is frequently
used to detect problems with heart valves or to measure blood flow through the arteries. Specifically, it is
useful in the work up of stroke patients, in assessing
blood flow in the abdomen or legs, and in viewing the
heart to monitor carotid artery diseases.
Precautions
The test is widely used because it is noninvasive,
uses no x rays, and gives excellent images. It is harmless, painless, and widely available.
Description
Doppler ultrasonography makes use of two different principles. The ultrasound principle is this:
when a high-frequency sound is produced and aimed
at a target, it will be reflected by its target and the
reflected sound can be detected back at its origin. In
addition, it is known that certain crystals (called piezoelectric crystals) produce an electrical pulse when
vibrated by a returning sound.
The Doppler principle is simply that sound pitch
increases as the source moves toward the listener and
decreases as it moves away.
Medical science utilizes these two principles in the
following way. A transducer (sometimes called a
probe) containing piezoelectric crystals sends a series
of short sound pulses into the body and pauses
between each pulse to listen for the returning sounds.
The machine then determines the direction and depth
of each returning sound and coverts this into a point of
light on a television monitor. Thousands of these
pulses are computed and displayed every second to
produce an image of the organ being studied. The
image allows the doctor to see the organ functioning
in real time.
The newest addition to this test is the addition of
color. Adding color to the image shows the direction
and rate of blood flow more clearly.
During a Doppler ultrasonography procedure the
technician will apply a gel to the skin, then place
the transducer against the skin at various angles. The
transducer sends the information it receives to a television monitor that shows a moving image of the
organ being studied. The technician can save these
images either on video tape, paper, or x-ray film for
further study.
Preparation
There is no special preparation needed for this
test. The ultrasound technician may apply a clear gel
to the skin in order to help the transducer more freely
over the body.
Aftercare
No aftercare is necessary.
Normal results
A Doppler ultrasonography test showing no
restricted blood flow is a normal finding.
Abnormal results
Disrupted or obstructed blood flow through
the neck arteries may indicate the person is a risk of
having a stroke. (Narrowed arterial flow in the legs
does not necessarily indicate a risk of stroke.)