Definition
Drug metabolism is the process by which the body
breaks down and converts medication into active
chemical substances.
Precautions
Drugs can interact with other drugs, foods, and
beverages. Interactions can lessen or magnify the
desired therapeutic effect of a drug, or may cause
unwanted or unexpected side effects. There are thousands of possible drug-to-drug and drug-to-food interactions, and many medications and supplements are
contraindicated (not recommended) under certain
conditions or in patients with specific diseases and
disorders. This is why it is imperative that patients
always keep their physician fully informed about
all drugs and dietary supplements (including herbal
remedies) they are taking.
Description
The primary site of drug metabolism is the liver,
the organ that plays a major role in metabolism, digestion, detoxification, and elimination of substances
from the body. Enzymes in the liver are responsible
for chemically changing drug components into
substances known as metabolites. Metabolites are
then bound to other substances for excretion through
the lungs, or bodily fluids such as saliva, sweat, breast
milk, and urine, or through reabsorption by the intestines. The primary mode of excretion is through the
kidneys.The family of liver isoenzymes known as cytochrome P-450 are crucial to drug metabolism. These
enzymes (labeled CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19,
CYP2D6, and CYP3A4) have a catabolic action on
substances, breaking them down into metabolites.
Consequently, they also act to lower the concentration
of medication in the bloodstream.
Drug interactions can occur when one drug inhibits or induces a P-450 that acts on another drug. An
example is nicotine, a drug contained in tobacco, and
known to induce P-450s. Individuals with liver disease
(e.g., cirrhosis) may also have insufficient levels of
P-450 enzymes. As a result, the concentration of
drugs metabolized by these enzymes (e.g., amprenavir
and other protease inhibitors) remains high and can
build up to toxic levels in the bloodstream. In addition,
certain medications and foods, such as grapefruit
juice, can inactivate or lessen the metabolic activity
of P-450s. Changing the drug dosage can alleviate the
problem in some cases.
The metabolic rate can vary significantly from
person to person, and drug dosages that work quickly
and effectively in one individual may not work well for
another. Factors such as genetics, environment,
nutrition, and age also influence drug metabolism;
infants and elderly patients may have a reduced capacity to metabolize certain drugs, and may require
adjustments in dosage.
Causes and symptoms
Drugs that commonly interact with other medications include:
 Diuretics. Diuretics such as hydrochlorothiazide can
reduce serum potassium and sodium electrolyte
levels when taken with digoxin and lithium,
respectively.
 Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). MAOI
antidepressants can cause convulsions and other serious side effects when used with tricyclic antidepressants (e.g., Imipramine, Nortriptyline), selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), or sympathomimetic drugs (e.g., amphetamines).
 Antibiotics. Antibiotics may reduce the efficiency of
oral contraceptives.
 Metals. Medications containing metals, such as antacids with aluminum additives and iron supplements,
can reduce the absorption of tetracyclines and
fluoroquinolones.
 Drugs that inhibit liver enzyme function. Drugs that
slow drug metabolism include ciprofloxacin,
erythromycin, fluoxetine, nefazodone, paroxetine,
and ritonavir. The therapeutic effect of other medications taken with these drugs may be amplified.
Warfarin, a blood thinner, should be used with
great caution in individuals taking these drugs.
Foods and beverages that may interact with drugs
include:
 Grapefruit juice. Grapefruit juice inhibits the metabolism of many medications, including cyclosporine,
felodipine, nifedipine, nitrendipine, nisoldipine,
carbamazepine, triazolam, and midazolam.
 Foods and beverages with tyramines. Red wine,
malted beers, smoked foods (e.g., fish and meats),
dried fruits, and aged cheeses may contain tyramines,
and can cause a severe and dangerous elevation in
blood pressure when taken with MAOI inhibitors
(a class of antidepressants).
 Dairy products. Milk, cream, and other dairy products containing calcium can prevention the absorption of antibiotics such as tetracycline, doxycycline,
and ciprofloxacin when they are taken with the drug.
In addition, whole milk with vitamin D can cause
milk-alkali syndrome in patients taking aluminum
hydroxide antacids.
 Caffeinated beverages. The caffeine contained in
coffee and colas can influence drug metabolism.
 Alcohol. Alcohol is a central nervous system depressant, and should not be taken with other CNS
depressants (e.g., antipsychotics, antihistamines). In
addition, certain fermented beverages may contain
tyramines.
This list is not all-inclusive and individuals should
always let their doctor and pharmacist know when
they are taking other medications, herbal remedies,
or dietary supplements. Anyone who experiences a
serious reaction to a drug that is not consistent with
its product labeling should report the event to their
doctor and/or the MedWatch adverse event reporting
system of the United States Food and Drug
Administration (FDA).
Alternative treatment
The growing use of herbal supplements has also
increased the opportunity for adverse drug and herbal
interactions. In 2000, the FDA issued a warning on the
popular herb St. John’s wort (Hypericum perforatum).
The supplement was found to inhibit the effect of
indinavir, a protease inhibitor used in the treatment
of HIV. It may also affect the action of cyclosporine
and other protease inhibitors (e.g., amprenavir,ritonavir). Further clinical studies are still necessary to
determine the full metabolic effects of the herb.
Other herbs which may interact with allopathic
medications include gingko bilboa, ginseng, and garlic, which may all heighten the blood thinning effect of
the anticoagulant warfarin. Because herbs are regulated by the FDA as dietary supplements, they do not
require the same extensive clinical trials and premarket testing as drugs do before they are cleared for sale
in the United States. As such, there is still much
to learn about the potential interactions and adverse
effects associated with herbal supplements.
Individuals who experience serious side effects from
dietary supplements should report them to FDA’s
MedWatch program.
Diagnosis
Drug interactions can be difficult to detect. In
some cases, adverse reactions may closely resemble
the symptoms of the disease or condition the medication was prescribed to treat. Patients who take a number of medications or self-treat with over-the-counter
drugs and/or herbal remedies may not be able to
determine which drug actually triggered the interaction. A 2001 study by University of Florida researchers found that less than half of the women
participating disclosed their use of herbal therapies
to their healthcare providers. In cases where a serious
drug or herb interaction occurs, withholding this
information can delay diagnosis and put the patient
at increased risk.
Treatment
Treatment of a drug interaction is dependant on a
number of factors, including the medication(s) or supplements used and the medical history of the patient.
A dosage adjustment may reverse the effects of some
interactions. Serious or life-threatening interactions
will require more aggressive therapies.
Prevention
Patients with chronic health conditions, particularly those with liver disorders, should always
inform their healthcare professional before taking
any over-the-counter (OTC) medications or dietary
supplements. Because of the risk for a drug-to-drug
interaction, individuals should also let their doctor
know if they are taking drugs prescribed by other
physicians. Individuals should closely follow
instructions for use and package directions on
both prescription and over-the-counter drugs.
Consulting with a pharmacist and/or physician
may be beneficial if package directions are unclear
to the patient.
As a rule, grapefruit juice should not be taken
with medication unless recommended by a doctor.
Patients taking MAOI inhibitors should always
check food and beverage labels to ensure tyramines
are not included, and should avoid all fermented
drinks.