Definition
Dysfunctional uterine bleeding is irregular,
abnormal uterine bleeding that is not caused by a
tumor, infection, or pregnancy.
Description
Dysfunctional uterine bleeding (DUB) is a disorder that occurs most frequently in women at the beginning and end of their reproductive lives. About half
the cases occur in women over 45 years of age, and
about one fifth occur in women under age 20.
Dysfunctional uterine bleeding is diagnosed when
other causes of uterine bleeding have been eliminated.
Failure of the ovary to release an egg during the menstrual cycle occurs in about 70% of women with DUB.
This is probably related to a hormonal imbalance.
DUB is common in women who have polycystic
ovary syndrome (cysts on the ovaries). Women who
are on dialysis may also have heavy or prolonged
periods. So do some women who use an intrauterine
device (IUD) for birth control.
DUB is similar to several other types of uterine
bleeding disorders and sometimes overlaps these
conditions.
Menorrhagia
Menorrhagia, sometimes called hypermenorrhea,
is another term for abnormally long, heavy periods.
This type of period can be a symptom of DUB, or
many other diseases or disorders. In menorrhagia, menstrual periods occur regularly, but last more than seven
days, and blood loss exceeds 3 oz (88.7 ml). Passing
blood clots is common. Between 15–20% of healthy
women experience debilitating menorrhagia that interferes with their normal activities. Menorrhagia may or
may not signify a serious underlying problem.
Metrorrhagia
Metrorrhagia is bleeding between menstrual periods. Bleeding is heavy and irregular as opposed to
ovulatory spotting which is light bleeding, in midcycle, at the time of ovulation.
Polymenorrhea
Polymenorrhea describes the condition of having
too frequent periods. Periods occur more often than
every 21 days, and ovulation usually does not occur
during the cycle.
Causes and symptoms
Dysfunctional uterine bleeding often occurs when
the endometrium, or lining of the uterus, is stimulated
to grow by the hormone estrogen. When exposure to
estrogen is extended, or not balanced by the presence
of progesterone, the endometrium continues to grow
until it outgrows its blood supply. Then it sloughs off,
causing irregular bleeding. If the bleeding is heavy
enough and frequent enough, anemia can result.
Menorrhagia is representative of DUB. It is
caused by many conditions including some outside
the reproductive system. Causes of menorrhagia
include:
 adenomyosis (a benign condition characterized by
growths in the area of the uterus)
 imbalance between the hormones estrogen and
progesterone
 fibroid tumors
 pelvic infection
 endometrial cancer (cancer of the inner mucous
membrane of the uterus)
 endometrial polyps
 endometriosis (a condition in which endometrial
or endrometrial-like tissue appears outside of its
normal place in the uterus)
 use of an intrauterine device (IUD) for contraception
 hypothyroidism
 blood clotting problems (rare)
 lupus erythematosus
 pelvic inflammatory disease
 steroid therapy
 advanced liver disease
 renal (kidney) disease
 chemotherapy (cancer treatment with chemicals)
 To diagnose dysfunctional uterine bleeding,
many of the potential causes mentioned above must
be eliminated. When all potential causes connected
with pregnancy, infection, and tumors (benign or
malignant) are eliminated, then menorrhagia is presumed to be caused by dysfunctional uterine
bleeding.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of any menstrual irregularity begins
with the patient herself. The doctor will ask for a
detailed description of the problem, and take a
history of how long it has existed, and any patterns
the patient has observed. A woman can assist the
doctor in diagnosing the cause of abnormal uterine
bleeding by keeping a record of the time, frequency, length, and quantity of bleeding. She
should also tell the doctor about any illnesses,
including long-standing conditions, like diabetes
mellitus. The doctor will also inquire about sexual
activity, use of contraceptives, current medications,
and past surgical procedures.
Laboratory tests
After taking the woman’s history, the gynecologist or family practitioner does a pelvic examination
and Pap smear. To rule out specific causes of abnormal bleeding, the doctor may also do a pregnancy test
and blood tests to check the level of thyroid hormone.
Based on the initial test results, the doctor may want to
do tests to determine the level of other hormones that
play a role in reproduction. A test of blood clotting
time and an adrenal function test are also commonly
done.
Imaging
Imaging tests are important diagnostic tools for
evaluating abnormal uterine bleeding. Ultrasound
examination of the pelvic and abdominal area is used
to help locate uterine fibroids, also called uterine leiomyoma, a type of tumor. Visual examination through
hysterscopy–where a camera inside a thin tube is
inserted directly into the uterus so that the doctor
can see the uterine lining–is also used to assess the
condition of the uterus.
Hystersalpingography can help outline endometrial polyps and fibroids and help detect endometrial
cancer. In this procedure an x ray is taken after contrast media has been injected into the cervix. Magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) of the pelvic region can also
be used to locate fibroids and tumors.
Invasive procedures
Endometrial biopsy (the removal and examination
of endometrial tissue) is the most important testing
procedure. It allows the doctor to sample small areas
of the uterine lining, while cervical biopsy allows the
cervix to be sampled. Tissues are then examined for
any abnormalities.
Dilation and curettage (D & C), once common is
rarely done today for diagnosis of DUB. It is done
while the patient is under either general or regional
anesthesia. Women over 30 are more likely to need a
D & C, as part of the diagnostic procedure, than
younger women.
Because DUB is diagnosed by eliminating other
possible disorders, diagnosis can take a long time and
involve many tests and procedures. Older women are
likely to need more extensive tests than adolescents
because the likelihood of reproductive cancers is
greater in this age group, and therefore must be definitively eliminated before treating bleeding symptoms.
Treatment
Treatment of DUB depends on the cause of the
bleeding and the age of the patient. When the underlying cause of the disorder is known, that disorder is
treated. Otherwise the goal of treatment is to relieve
the symptoms to a degree that uterine bleeding does
not interfere with a woman’s normal activities or cause
anemia.
Generally the first approach to controlling DUB
is to use oral contraceptives that provide a balance
between the hormones estrogen and progesterone.
Oral contraceptives are often very effective in adolescents and young women in their twenties. NSAIDs
(nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs), like Naprosyn
and Motrin, are also used to treat DUB.
When bleeding cannot be controlled by hormone
treatment, surgery may be necessary. Dilation and
curettage sometimes relieves the symptoms of DUB.
If that fails, endometrial ablation removes the uterine
lining, but preserves a woman’s uterus. This procedure
is sometimes be used instead of hysterectomy.
However, as it affects the uterus, it can only be used
when a woman has completed her childbearing years.
The prescription of iron is also important to decrease
the risk of enemia.
Until the 1980s, hysterectomy often was used to
treat heavy uterine bleeding. Today hysterectomy is
used less frequently to treat DUB, and then only after
other methods of controlling the symptoms have failed.
A hysterectomy leaves a woman unable to bear children,
and, therefore, is limited largely to women who are
unable to, or uninterested in, bearing children. Still,
hysterectomy is a common treatment for long-standing
DUB in women done with childbearing.
Alternative treatment
Alternative practitioners concentrate on good
nutrition as a way to prevent heavy periods that are
not caused by uterine fibroids, endometrial polyps,
endometriosis, or cancer. Iron supplementation
(100 mg per day) not only helps prevent anemia, but
also appears to reduce menorrhagia in many women.
Other recommended dietary supplements include vitamins A and C. Vitamin C improves capillary fragility
and enhances iron uptake.
Vitamin E and bioflavonoid supplements are also
recommended. Vitamin E can help reduce blood flow,
and bioflavonoids help strengthen the capillaries.
Vitamin K is known to play a role in clotting and is
helpful in situations where heavy bleeding may be due
to clotting abnormalities
Botanical medicines used to assist in treating
abnormal bleeding include spotted cranesbill
(Geranium maculatum), birthroot (Trillium pendulum),
blue cohosh (Caulophyllum thalictroides), witch hazel
(Hamamelis virginiana), shepherd’s purse (Capsella
bursa-pastoris), and yarrow (Achillea millifolia).
These are all stiptic herbs that act to tighten blood
vessels and tissue. Hormonal balance can also be
addressed with herbal formulations containing
phytoestrogens and phytoprogesterone.
Prognosis
Response to treatment for DUB is highly individual
and is not easy to predict. The outcome depends largely
on the woman’s medical condition and her age. Many
women, especially adolescents, are successfully treated
with hormones (usually oral contraceptives). As a last
resort, hysterectomy removes the source of the problem
by removing the uterus, but this operation is not without
risk, or the possibility of complications.
Prevention
Dysfunctional uterine bleeding is not a preventable disorder.