Definition
Dyslexia is a learning disability characterized by
problems in reading, spelling, writing, speaking, or
listening. In many cases, dyslexia appears to be
inherited.
Description
The word dyslexia is derived from the Greek
word, dys (meaning poor or inadequate) and the
word lexis (meaning words or language).
The National Institutes of Health estimates that
about 15% of the United States population is affected
by learning disabilities, mostly with problems in language and reading. The condition appears in all ages,
races, and income levels. Dyslexia is not a disease, but
describes rather a different kind of mind that learns in
a different way from other people. Many people with
the condition are gifted and very productive; dyslexia
is not at all linked to low intelligence. In fact, intelligence has nothing to do with dyslexia.
Dyslexic children seem to have trouble learning
early reading skills, problems hearing individual
sounds in words, analyzing whole words in parts,
and blending sounds into words. Letters such as ‘‘d’’
and ‘‘b’’ may be confused.
When a person is dyslexic, there is often an unexpected difference between achievement and aptitude.
However, each person with dyslexia has different
strengths and weaknesses, although many have unusual talents in art, athletics, architecture, graphics,
drama, music, or engineering. These special talents
are often in areas that require the ability to integrate
sight, spatial skills, and coordination.
Often, a person with dyslexia has a problem translating language into thought (such as in listening or
reading), or translating thought into language (such as
in writing or speaking).
Common characteristics include problems with:
 identifying single words
 understanding sounds in words, sound order, or
rhymes
 spelling
 transposing letters in words
 handwriting
 reading comprehension
 delayed spoken language
 confusion with directions, or right/left handedness
 confusion with opposites (up/down, early/late, and
so on)
 mathematics
Causes and symptoms
The underlying cause of dyslexia is not known,
although research suggests the condition is often
inherited. In 1999, The Centre for Reading Research
in Norway presented the first research to study the
largest family with reading problems ever known. By
studying the reading and writing abilities of close to 80
family members across four generations the researchers reported, for the first time, that chromosome 2 can
be involved in the inheritability of dyslexia. When a
fault occurs on this gene it leads to difficulties in
processing written language. Previous studies have
pointed out linkages of other potential dyslexia genes
to chromosome 1, chromosome 15 (DYX1 gene), and
to chromosome 6 (DYX2 gene). The researchers who
pinpointed the newly localized gene on chromosome 2
(DYX3) hope that this finding will lead to earlier and
more precise diagnoses of dyslexia.
New research suggests a possible link with a subtle
visual problem that affects the speed with which
affected people can read. Other experts believe that
dyslexia is related to differences in the structure and
function of the brain that manifests differently in different people.
Diagnosis
Anyone who is suspected to have dyslexia should
have a comprehensive evaluation, including hearing,
vision, and intelligence testing. The test should include
all areas of learning and learning processes, not just
reading.
As further research pinpoints the genes responsible for some cases of dyslexia, there is a possibility that
earlier testing will be established to allow for timely
interventions to prevent the onset of the condition and
to treat it when it does occur. Unfortunately, in many
schools, a child is not identified as having dyslexia
until after repeated failures.
Treatment
If a child is diagnosed with dyslexia, the parents
should find out from the school or the diagnostician
exactly what the problem is, and what method of
teaching is recommended and why. No single method
will work with every child, and experts often disagree
as to the best method to use.
The primary focus of treatment is aimed at helping the specific learning problem of each affected person. Most often, this may include modifying teaching
methods and the educational environment, since traditional educational methods will not always work
with a dyslexic child.
People with dyslexia need a structured language
program, with direct instruction in the letter-sound
system. Teachers must give the rules governing written language. Most experts agree that the teacher
should emphasize the association between simple
phonetic units with letters or letter groups, rather
than an approach that stresses memorizing whole
words.
It is important to teach these students using all
the senses: hearing, touching, writing, and speaking, provided by an instructor who is specifically
trained in a program that is effective for dyslexic
students.
Prognosis
Many successful and even famous people have
dyslexia. How well a person with dyslexia functions
in life depends on the way the disability affects that
person. There is a great deal of variation among different people with dyslexia, producing different symptoms and different degrees of severity.
Prognosis is usually good if the condition is diagnosed early, and if the person has a strong self image
with supportive family, friends, and teachers. It is
imperative for a good outcome that the person be
involved in a good remedial program.