Definition
Dysmenorrhea is the occurrance of painful
cramps during menstruation.
Description
More than half of all girls and women suffer from
dysmenorrhea (cramps), a dull or throbbing pain that
usually centers in the lower mid-abdomen, radiating
toward the lower back or thighs. Menstruating women
of any age can experience cramps.
While the pain may be only mild for some women,
others experience severe discomfort that can significantly interfere with everyday activities for several
days each month.
Causes and symptoms
Dysmenorrhea is called ‘‘primary’’ when there is no
specific abnormality, and ‘‘secondary’’ when the pain is
caused by an underlying gynecological problem. It
is believed that primary dysmenorrhea occurs when
hormone-like substances called ‘‘prostaglandins’’
produced by uterine tissue trigger strong muscle contractions in the uterus during menstruation. However,
the level of prostaglandins does not seem to have
anything to do with how strong a woman’s cramps
are. Some women have high levels of prostaglandins
and no cramps, whereas other women with low levels
have severe cramps. This is why experts assume that
cramps must also be related to other things (such as
genetics, stress, and different body types) in addition to
prostaglandins. The first year or two of a girl’s periods
are not usually very painful. However, once ovulation
begins, the blood levels of the prostaglandins rise, leading to stronger contractions.
Secondary dysmenorrhea may be caused by endometriosis, fibroid tumors, or an infection in the pelvis.
The likelihood that a woman will have cramps
increases if she:
 has a family history of painful periods
 leads a stressful life
 does not get enough exercise
 uses caffeine
 has pelvic inflammatory disease
Symptoms include a dull, throbbing cramping in
the lower abdomen that may radiate to the lower back
and thighs. In addition, some women may experience
nausea and vomiting, diarrhea, irritability, sweating, or
dizziness. Cramps usually last for two or three days at
the beginning of each menstrual period. Many women
often notice their painful periods disappear after they
have their first child, probably due to the stretching of
the opening of the uterus or because the birth improves
the uterine blood supply and muscle activity.
Diagnosis
A doctor should perform a thorough pelvic exam
and take a patient history to rule out an underlying
condition that could cause cramps.
Treatment
Secondary dysmenorrhea is controlled by treating
the underlying disorder.
Several drugs can lessen or completely eliminate
the pain of primary dysmenorrhea. The most popular
choice are the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs), which prevent or decrease the formation of
prostaglandins. These include aspirin, ibuprofen
(Advil), and naproxen (Aleve). For more severe pain,
prescription strength ibuprofen (Motrin) is available.
These drugs are usually begun at the first sign of the
period and taken for a day or two. There are many
different types of NSAIDs, and women may find that
one works better for them than the others.
If an NSAID is not available, acetaminophen
(Tylenol) may also help ease the pain. Heat applied to
the painful areamay bring relief, and a warm bath twice a
day also may help. While birth control pills will ease the
pain of dysmenorrhea because they lead to lower hormone levels, they are not usually prescribed just for pain
management unless the woman also wants to use them as
a birth control method. This is because these pills may
carry other more significant side effects and risks.
New studies of a drug patch containing glyceryl
trinitrate to treat dysmenorrhea suggest that it also
may help ease pain. This drug has been used in the
past to ease preterm contractions in pregnant women.
Alternative treatment
Simply changing the position of the body can help
ease cramps. The simplest technique is assuming the
fetal position, with knees pulled up to the chest while
hugging a heating pad or pillow to the abdomen.
Likewise, several yoga positions are popular ways to
ease menstrual pain. In the ‘‘cat stretch,’’ position, the
woman rests on her hands and knees, slowly arching
the back. The pelvic tilt is another popular yoga position, in which the woman lies with knees bent, and
then lifts the pelvis and buttocks.
Dietary recommendations to ease cramps include
increasing fiber, calcium, and complex carbohydrates,
cutting fat, red meat, dairy products, caffeine, salt,
and sugar. Smoking also has been found to worsen
cramps. Recent research suggests that vitamin B supplements, primarily vitamin B6 in a complex, magnesium, and fish oil supplements (omega-3 fatty acids)
also may help relieve cramps.
Other women find relief through visualization,
concentrating on the pain as a particular color and
gaining control of the sensations. Aromatherapy and
massage may ease pain for some women. Others find
that imagining a white light hovering over the painful
area can actually lessen the pain for brief periods.
Exercise may be a way to reduce the pain of menstrual cramps through the brain’s production of
endorphins, the body’s own painkillers. And orgasm
can make a woman feel more comfortable by releasing
tension in the pelvic muscles.
Acupuncture and Chinese herbs are another
popular alternative treatments for cramps.
Prognosis
Medication should lessen or eliminate pain.
Prevention
NSAIDs taken a day before the period begins
should eliminate cramps for some women.