Definition
Dysphasia is a partial or complete impairment of
the ability to communicate resulting from brain injury.
Description
Approximately one million Americans currently
suffer from one of the various forms of dysphasia, and
an additional 80,000 new cases occur annually. The
term ‘dysphasia’ is more frequently used by
European health professionals, whereas in North
American the term, aphasia is more commonly preferred. These two terms, however, can be and are used
interchangeably. They both refer to the full or partial
loss of verbal communication skills due to damage
or degeneration of the brain’s language centers.
Developmental Dysphasia is considered to be a learning disability, but will not be the focus of this article.
Verbal communication is derived from several
regions located in the language-dominant hemisphere
of the brain. These include the adjacent inferior parietal lobe, the inferolateral lobe, and the posterosuperior temporal lobe, as well as the subcortical connection
between these areas. Disease, direct trauma, lesion,
or infarction involving one or more of these regions
can disrupt or prevent proper language function.
Dysphasia does not necessarily prevent proper cognitive function, so the patient can think and feel with
perfect clarity. This can be extremely frustrating for
the patient, as they cannot express these thoughts and
feelings to others.
Dysphasia can occur in a variety of forms,
depending on how the communicative disruption
manifests. Classically, dysphasia can affect one or
more of the basic language functions: comprehension
(understanding spoken language), naming (identifying
items with words), repetition (repeating words or
phrases), and speech. Although there are several subtypes of dysphasias, they most commonly manifest in
one of three syndromes: expressive dysphasia, receptive dysphasia, or global dysphasia.
Expressive Dysphasia
Expressive dysphasia, also known as motor dysphasia, produces a conscious and recognizable disruption of a patient’s speech production and language
output. This includes the impairment of speech initiation, proper grammatical sequencing, and proper
word forming and articulation. Although patients
can perfectly understand what is said to them, they
have great difficulty communicating their thoughts.
BROCA’S DYSPHASIA. Broca’s dysphasia is the
most common type of expressive dysphasia. It is
caused by damage to the lower area of the premotor
cortex, located just in front of the primary motor
cortex. This region is most commonly referred to as
the Broca’s area. Speech for patients suffering from
Broca’s dysphasia may be completely impossible.
Others may be able to form single words or full sentences, but only through great effort. ‘‘Telegraphing,’’
the omission of articles and conjunctions, may also be
exhibited.
TRANSCORTICAL DYSPHASIA. Also known as isolation syndrome, transcortical dysphasia is caused by
damage to the language-dominant brain that separates all or parts of the central region from the rest of
the brain. There are three sub-classes of transcortical
dysphasia, which define the impairments to a patient’s
ability to repeat words, sentences, and phrases:
transcortical motor dysphasia, transcortical sensory
dysphasia, and mixed transcortical dysphasia.
Additional impairments may occur depending on the
extent and location of the damage.
Receptive Dysphasia
Receptive dysphasia, also known as sensory dysphasia, impairs the patient’s comprehension and
meaning of language. Unlike expressive dysphasia,
the patient can speak fluently and articulately, but
will utilize meaningless words, nonsensical grammar,
and unnecessary phrases to the point of becoming
incomprehensible. However, they will be completely
unaware of their mistakes. Additionally, the patient
will find it difficult to comprehend spoken language
and/or word-object relation.
WERNICKE’S DYSPHASIA. Also known as semantic
dysphasia, Wernicke’s dysphasia is the most common
of the receptive dysphasia. It is caused by damage to
the Wernicke’s area, located in the posterior superior
temporal lobe of the language-dominant hemisphere.
Although the patient can speak clearly and at length,
many of their words, phases, and sentences will be
nonsensical in nature. Additionally, they will experience difficulty in understanding spoken language, if
not suffer a complete lack of comprehension.
Semantic distinctions between words may become
mixed up and jumbled, furthering confusion.
ANOMIC DYSPHASIA. Anomic dysphasia, also
referred to as amnesic dysphasia, is caused by damage
to the temporal parietal area and/or the angular gyrus
region. Although very similar to Wernicke’s dysphasia, anomic dysphasia is distinguished by its disruption
of a patient’s word-retrieval skills. They will be unable
to correctly name people or objects, causing them to
pause or substitute generalized words (like ‘‘thing’’).
Otherwise, the patient will exhibit few, if any, language
impairments.
CONDUCTION DYSPHASIA. Also known as associative dysphasia, conduction dysphasia is a relatively
uncommon disease (representing only 10% of the
cases). Damage to the upper temporal lobe, lower
parietal, or connection between the Wernicke’s and
Broca’s areas can result in the inability to repeat
words, phrases, or sentences. The patient may also
suffer the inability to describe people or objects in the
proper terms.
Global Dysphasia
Global dysphasia, the third most common form of
dysphasia, results from damage to both the anterior
and posterior regions of the language-dominant hemisphere. In global dysphasia, all of the patient’s language skills are disrupted; however, some may be
disrupted more severely than others.
Causes & symptoms
Currently, over one million people in the United
States suffer a permanent type of dysphasia. Although
dysphasia may manifest in several ways, the common
cause for its onset is damage or trauma to the brain.
Stroke, in particular, is the most common cause for
dysphasia. Of the half million stroke victims reported
annually in the United States, approximately 100,000
will suffer some form of dysphasia. Infection, direct
trauma, transient ischemic attack (TIA), brain tumors,
and degeneration can also instigate the onset of
dysphasia.
Symptoms of dysphasia will quickly manifest
after damage to the brain has occurred, and will present in accordance to the particular type of dysphasia
suffered. Due to the proximity to areas of the brain
that control motor function, expressive dysphasias can
be accompanied by noticeable motor impairment. The
majority of symptoms will be language related,
including:
 Difficulty remembering words
 Difficulty naming objects and/or people
 Difficulty speaking in complete and/or meaningful
sentences
 Difficulty speaking in any fashion
 Difficulty reading or writing
 Difficulty expressing thoughts and feelings
 Difficulty understanding spoken language
 Using incorrect or jumbled words
 Using words in the wrong order
Diagnosis
Dysphasia is frequently diagnosed while the
patient is being treated for injury to the brain, be it
from trauma or disease. The health professional, typically a neurologist, will conduct standard cognitive
tests, including tests to determine whether the
patient’s language centers have been affected. If the
patient exhibits signs of difficulty communicating,
they will often be referred to a speech-language pathologist. In turn, the pathologist will conduct a comprehensive examination of the patient’s ability language
and comprehension skills. This examination may begin
with evaluating the patient’s ability to repeat words and
phrases, recognize and describe objects, and comprehend what is said to them. More extensive and standardized language-based tests may be required, including
the Porch Index of Speech Ability and the Boston
Diagnostic Aphasia Examination. Based on the result
of the examinations, the health professional will be able
to determine the type of dysphasia inflicting the patient.
More extensive damage may require the use of computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging for
an effective diagnosis.
Treatment
Initially it is necessary to treat and stabilize the
injury underlying the development of the patient’s
dysphasia. In some cases, such as with damage caused
by TIA, a full recovery can be expedient and take only
a few days. Unfortunately, most dysphasias can take
months, if not years, to recover from. Even after prolonged therapy, many patients never achieve a full
recovery. Efficacy of treatment greatly depends on
the promptness with which it begins. For this reason,
many medical facilities have speech-language pathologists on staff to begin the initial treatment process as
quickly as possible.
There is no medical or surgical cure for dysphasia.
Treatment, instead, relies strongly upon the use of
various speech therapies. Much like physical therapy
strengthens muscles and bones back to normalcy,
speech therapy allow the patient to regain language
function, as well as rebuild their communications
skills. Treatment is typically conducted with a trained
speech therapist. However, group sessions are common and allow the patient to practice their language
skills in a non-threatening environment with others
sharing their disability. Although much of therapeutic
work is conducted by a speech therapist, friends and
family also play a vital role in the patient’s recovery.
They can help the patient continually practice and
exercise language skills while outside the therapeutic
setting. Many times, family members are included on
therapy sessions to teach them how to communicate
with and understand the patient.
There are several treatments available, which utilize the patient’s remaining language abilities to
rebuild and compensate for those that were lost.
These include out-put focused therapy (stimulationresponse), psycholinguistic therapy (cognitive), cognitive neurorehabilitation, and combinations thereof.
Although these treatments approach aphasia differently, they all share a common thread by identifying
the specific communication deficits and then targeting
them with various modalities (computer-aided therapy, picture cards, reading and writing exercises,
speech practice, etc.). These techniques stimulate
the various parts of the brain associated with language, memory, and understanding, and thus allow it
to heal.
Prognosis
Fortunately, about half of patients will suffer
from transient dysphasia, in which the symptoms
fade completely after only a few days. However, a
patient’s prognosis will greatly depend on several
factors, such as the location and extent of the
underlying damage. Additional factors of importance are the patient’s age, general health, and
mental health and motivation. Handedness may
also be an indicator for recovery, as left-handed
individuals have language centers located in both
hemispheres of the brain (not just the left). As
such, left-handed patients have access to language
skills from either side of the brain, which can
expedite their recovery. Even with therapy, dysphasia may take several years to overcome. Indeed,
some patients will never regain their pre-trauma
skill level of communication and speech.
Prevention
Dysphasia can be prevented by avoiding the
causes of brain injury and stroke, such as high blood
pressure. In particular, eating a healthy diet and not
smoking to maintain proper blood pressure will help
prevent damaging strokes. Although it is impossible to
predict head trauma, the use of head protection while
participating in dangerous sports or activities can
reduce the risk of serious brain damage.