Definition
Dyspepsia can be defined as painful, difficult, or
disturbed digestion, which may be accompanied by
symptoms such as nausea and vomiting, heartburn,
bloating, and stomach discomfort.
Causes and symptoms
The digestive problems may have an identifiable
cause, such as bacterial or viral infection, peptic ulcer,
gallbladder, or liver disease. The bacteria Helicobacter
pylori is often found in those individuals suffering
from duodenal or gastric ulcers. Investigation of
recurrent indigestion should rule out these possible
causes.
Often, there is no organic cause for the problem,
in which case dyspepsia is classified as functional or
nonulcer dyspepsia. There is evidence that functional
dyspepsia may be related to abnormal motility of the
upper gastrointestinal tract (a state known as dysmotility in which the esophagus, stomach, and upper
intestine behave abnormally). These patients may
respond to a group of drugs called prokinate agents.
A review of eating habits (e.g., chewing with the
mouth open, gulping food, or talking while chewing)
may reveal a tendency to swallow air. This may contribute to feeling bloated, or to excessive belching.
Smoking, caffeine, alcohol, or carbonated beverages
may contribute to the discomfort. When there is sensitivity or allergy to certain food substances, eating
those foods may cause gastrointestinal distress. Some
medications are associated with indigestion. Stomach
problems may also be a response to stress or emotional
unrest.Diagnosis
A physical examination by a health care professional may reveal mid-abdominal pain. A rectal examination may be done to rule out bleeding. If blood is
found on rectal exam, laboratory studies, including a
blood count may be ordered. Endoscopy and barium
studies may be used to rule out underlying gastrointestinal disease. Upper gastrointestinal x-ray studies
using barium may allow for visualization of abnormalities. Endoscopy permits collection of tissue and
culture specimens which may be used to further confirm a diagnosis.
Treatment
The treatment of dyspepsia is based on assessment
of symptoms and suspected causative factors. Clinical
evaluation is aimed at distinguishing those patients
who require immediate diagnostic work-ups from
those who can safely benefit from more conservative
initial treatment. Some of the latter may require only
reassurance, dietary modifications, or antacid use.
Medications to block production of stomach acids,
prokinate agents, or antibiotic treatment may be considered. Further diagnostic investigation is indicated if
there is severe abdominal pain, pain radiating to the
back, unexplained weight loss, difficulty swallowing, a
palpable mass, or anemia. Additional work-up is also
indicated if a patient does not respond to prescribed
medications.
Prognosis
Statistics show an average of 20% of patients with
dyspepsia have duodenalor gastric ulcer disease, 20%
have irritable bowel syndrome, fewer than 1% of
patients had cancer, and the range for functional, or
non-ulcer dyspepsia (gastritis or superficial erosions),
was from 5–40%.