Definition
Echinococcosis (Hydatid disease) refers to human
infection by the immature (larval) form of tapeworm,
Echinococcus. One of three forms of the Echinococcus
spp., E. granulosus, lives on dogs and livestock, and
infects humans through contact with these animals.
Allergic reactions and damage to various organs
from cyst formation are the most common forms of
disease in humans.
Description
E. granulosus is found in many areas of Africa,
China, South America, Australia, New Zealand, and
Mediterranean and eastern Europe, as well as in parts
of the western United States. The parasite lives in
regions where dogs and livestock cohabitate. Direct
exposure to infectious dogs, as well as parasitic eggs
released into the environment during shedding, are
both sources of human infection.
In humans, cysts containing the larvae develop
after ingestion of eggs. Cysts form primarily in the
lungs and liver. Cysts developing in the liver are
responsible for about two-thirds of echinococcosis
cases. Echinococcosis is a significant public health problem in many areas of the world, but control programs
have decreased the rate of infection in some regions.
In Kenya alone, the numbers of persons infected
each year is as high as 220 per 100,000 population.
Causes and symptoms
After ingestion, the eggs develop into embryos
within the intestines and then travel to the liver and
lungs through major blood vessels. The embryos then
begin to form cysts within the liver and lungs, causing
damage as they enlarge over a period of five to 20
years. Cysts may become over 8 in (20.3 cm) or more
in size and contain a huge amount of highly allergenic
fluid. Studies show that while the liver is most often
targeted, lungs, brain, heart, and bone can also be
affected.
The major symptoms are due to compression
damage, blockage of vessels and ducts (such as the
bile ducts), and leakage of fluid from cysts. The following symptoms are frequent.
 Liver involvement causes pain and eventually jaundice or cholangitis due to blockage of bile ducts.
Infection of cysts leads to abscesses in up to 20%.
 Lung cysts cause cough and chest pain.
 Bone cysts cause fractures and damage to bone tissue.
 Heart involvement leads to irregularities of heart
beat and inflammation of the covering of the heart
(pericardium).
 Allergic reactions occur from leakage of cyst fluid
that contains antigens. Itching, fever, and rashes are
frequent, and fatal allergic reactions (anaphylaxis)
have been reported. Eosinophils, which are blood
cells involved in allergic reactions, are increased in
many patients.
Diagnosis
X rays, computed tomography scans (CT scans),
and ultrasound are very helpful in detecting cysts.
Some cysts will develop characteristic hardening of
organ tissues from calcium deposits (calcifications).
Blood tests to detect antibodies are useful when
positive, but up to 50% of patients have negative
results. Examination of aspirated cyst fluid for
parasites can be diagnostic, but carries the danger of
a fatal allergic reaction. Treatment with anti-parasitic
medications before aspiration is reported to decrease
allergic complications and decrease the risk of spread
during the procedure.
Treatment
Treatment depends on the size and location of
cysts, as well as the symptoms they are producing.
Surgical removal of cysts and/or surrounding tissue
is the accepted method of treatment, but carries a risk
of cyst rupture with spread or allergic reactions.
Recent studies using medication alongside aspiration
and drainage of cysts instead of surgery are very
encouraging.
The medication albenzadole can be taken before
or after surgery or alone without surgery. However, its
effectiveness as a single treatment is still not known.
Multiple courses of medication are often necessary,
with cure rates of only about 30%. Response to
treatment is best monitored by serial CT scans or
similar x-ray studies.
Prevention
Good hand washing, treating infected dogs, and
preventing dogs’ access to slaughter houses discourage
spread of the disease. Limiting the population of stray
dogs has also been helpful.