Definition
Edema is a condition of abnormally large fluid
volume in the circulatory system or in tissues between
the body’s cells (interstitial spaces).
Description
Normally the body maintains a balance of fluid in
tissues by ensuring that the same of amount of water
entering the body also leaves it. The circulatory system
transports fluid within the body via its network of
blood vessels. The fluid, which contains oxygen and
nutrients needed by the cells, moves from the walls of
the blood vessels into the body’s tissues. After its nutrients are used up, fluid moves back into the blood vessels
and returns to the heart. The lymphatic system (a network of channels in the body that carry lymph, a colorless fluid containing white blood cells to fight infection)
also absorbs and transports this fluid. In edema, either
too much fluid moves from the blood vessels into the
tissues, or not enough fluid moves from the tissues back
into the blood vessels. This fluid imbalance can cause
mild to severe swelling in one or more parts of the body.
Causes and symptoms
Many ordinary factors can upset the balance of
fluid in the body to cause edema, including:
 Immobility. The leg muscles normally contract and
compress blood vessels to promote blood flow with
walking or running. When these muscles are not used,
blood can collect in the veins, making it difficult for
fluid to move from tissues back into the vessels.
 Heat. Warm temperatures cause the blood vessels to
expand, making it easier for fluid to cross into surrounding tissues. High humidity also aggravates this
situation.
 Medications. Certain drugs, such as steroids, hormone replacements, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs), and some blood pressure medications may affect how fast fluid leaves blood vessels.
 Intake of salty foods. The body needs a constant
concentration of salt in its tissues. When excess salt
is taken in, the body dilutes it by retaining fluid.
 Menstruation and pregnancy. The changing levels of
hormones affect the rate at which fluid enters and
leaves the tissues.
Some medical conditions may also cause edema,
including:
 Heart failure. When the heart is unable to maintain
adequate blood flow throughout the circulatory system, the excess fluid pressure within the blood vessels
can cause shifts into the interstitial spaces. Left-sided
heart failure can cause pulmonary edema, as fluid
shifts into the lungs. The patient may develop
rapid, shallow respirations, shortness of breath, and
a cough. Right-sided heart failure can cause pitting
edema, a swelling in the tissue under the skin of the
lower legs and feet. Pressing this tissue with a finger
tip leads to a noticeable momentary indentation.
 Kidney disease. The decrease in sodium and water
excretion can result in fluid retention and overload.
 Thyroid or liver disease. These conditions can change
the concentration of protein in the blood, affecting
fluid movement in and out of the tissues. In advanced
liver disease, the liver is enlarged and fluid may buildup in the abdomen.
 Malnutrition. Protein levels are decreased in the
blood, and in an effort to maintain a balance of
concentrations, fluid shifts out of the vessels and
causes edema in tissue spaces.
Some conditions that may cause swelling in just
one leg include:
 Blood clots. Clots can cause pooling of fluid and may
be accompanied by discoloration and pain. In some
instances, clots may cause no pain.
 Weakened veins. Varicose veins, or veins whose walls
or valves are weak, can allow blood to pool in the
legs. This is a common condition.
 Infection and inflammation. Infection in leg tissues
can cause inflammation and increasing blood flow to
the area. Inflammatory diseases, such as gout or
arthritis, can also result in swelling.
 Lymphedema. Blocked lymph channels may be
caused by infection, scar tissue, or hereditary conditions. Lymph that can’t drain properly results in
edema. Lymphedema may also occur after cancer
treatments, when the lymph system is impaired by
surgery, radiation, or chemotherapy.
 Tumor. Abnormal masses can compress leg vessels
and lymph channels, affecting the rate of fluid
movement.
Symptoms vary depending on the cause of edema.
In general, weight gain, puffy eyelids, and swelling of
the legs may occur as a result of excess fluid volume.
Pulse rate and blood pressure may be elevated. Hand
and neck veins may be observed as fuller.
Diagnosis
Edema is a sign of an underlying problem, rather
than a disease unto itself. A diagnostic explanation
should be sought. Patient history and presenting
symptoms, along with laboratory blood studies, if
indicated, assist the health professional in determining
the cause of the edema.
Treatment
Treatment of edema is based on the cause. Simple
steps to lessen fluid build-up may include:
 Reducing sodium intake. A high sodium level causes
or aggravates fluid retention.
 Maintaining proper weight. Being overweight slows
body fluid circulation and puts extra pressure on the
veins.
 Exercise. Regular exercise stimulates circulation.
 Elevation of the legs. Placing the legs at least 12 in
(30.5 cm) above the level of the heart for 10–15
minutes, three to four times a day, stimulates excess
fluid re-entry into the circulatory system.
 Use of support stocking. Elastic stockings, available
at most medical supply or drug stores, will compress
the leg vessels, promoting circulation and decreasing
pooling of fluid due to gravity.
 Massage. Massaging the body part can help to stimulate the release of excess fluids, but should be
avoided if the patient has blood clots in the veins.
 Travel breaks. Sitting for long periods will increase
swelling in the feet and ankles. Standing and/or
walking at least every hour or two will help stimulate
blood flow.
The three ‘‘Ds’’–diuretics, digitalis, and diet–are
frequently prescribed for medical conditions that
result in excess fluid volume. Diuretics are medications
that promote urination of sodium and water. Digoxin
is a digitalis preparation that is sometimes needed to
decrease heart rate and increase the strength of the
heart’s contractions. Dietary recommendations
include less sodium in order to decrease fluid retention. Consideration of adequate protein intake is
also made.
For patients with lymphedema, a combination of
therapies may prove effective. Combined decongestive
therapy includes the use of manual lymph drainage
(MLD), compression bandaging, garments and
pumps, and physical therapy. MLD involves the use
of light massage of the subcutaneous tissue where the
lymph vessels predominate. Massage begins in an area
of the body trunk where there is normal lymph function and proceeds to areas of lymphatic insufficiency,
in an effort to stimulate new drainage tract development. (MLD should not be used for patients with
active cancer, deep vein clots, congestive heart failure,
or cellulitis.) MLD sessions are followed by application of compression garments or pumps. Physical
therapy is aimed at strengthening the affected limb
and increasing joint mobility.Alternative treatment
Dietary changes, in addition to cutting back the
amount of sodium eaten, may also help reduce
edema. Foods that worsen edema, such as alcohol,
caffeine, sugar, dairy products, soy sauce, animal
protein, chocolate, olives, and pickles, should be
avoided. Diuretic herbs can also help relieve edema.
One of the best herbs for this purpose is dandelion
(Taraxacum mongolicum), since, in addition to its
diuretic action, it is a rich source of potassium.
(Diuretics flush potassium from the body and it
must be replaced to avoid potassium deficiency.)
Hydrotherapy using daily contrast applications of
hot and cold (either compresses or immersion) may
also be helpful.