Definition
The Ehlers-Danlos syndromes (EDS) refer to a
group of inherited disorders that affect collagen structure and function. Genetic abnormalities in the
manufacturing of collagen within the body affect
connective tissues, causing them to be abnormally
weak.
Description
Collagen is a strong, fibrous protein that lends
strength and elasticity to connective tissues such as
the skin, tendons, organ walls, cartilage, and blood
vessels. Each of these connective tissues requires collagen tailored to meet its specific purposes. The many
roles of collagen are reflected in the number of genes
dedicated to its production. There are at least 28 genes
in humans that encode at least 19 different types of
collagen. Mutations in these genes can affect basic
construction as well as the fine-tuned processing of
the collagen.
EDS was originally described by Dr. Van
Meekeren in 1682. Dr. Ehlers and Dr. Danlos further
characterized the disease in 1901 and 1908, respectively. Today, according to the Ehlers-Danlos
National Foundation, one in 5,000 to one in 10,000
people are affected by some form of EDS.
EDS is a group of genetic disorders that usually
affects the skin, ligaments, joints, and blood vessels.
Classification of EDS types was revised in 1997. The
new classification involves categorizing the different
forms of EDS into six major sub-types, including classical, hypermobility, vascular, kyphoscoliosis, arthrochalasia, and dermatosparaxis, and a collection of rare
or poorly defined varieties. This new classification is
simpler and based more on descriptions of the actual
symptoms.
Classical type
Under the old classification system, EDS classical
type was divided into two separate types: type I and
type II. The major symptoms involved in EDS classical
type are the skin and joints. The skin has a smooth,
velvety texture and bruises easily. Affected individuals
typically have extensive scaring, particularly at the
knees, elbows, forehead, and chin. The joints are hyperextensible, giving a tendency towards dislocation of the
hip, shoulder, elbow, knee, or clavicle. Due to
decreased muscle tone, affected infants may experience a delay in reaching motor milestones. Children may
have a tendency to develop hernias or other organ
shifts within the abdomen. Sprains and partial or complete joint dilocations are also common. Symptoms can
range from mild to severe. EDS classical type is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner.
There are three major clinical diagnostic criteria
for EDS classical type. These include skin hyperextensibility, unusually wide scars, and joint hypermobility.
At this time there is no definitive test for the diagnosis
of classical EDS. Both DNA and biochemical studies
have been used to help identify affected individuals. In
some cases, a skin biopsy has been found to be useful
in confirming a diagnosis. Unfortunately, these tests
are not sensitive enough to identify all individuals with
classical EDS. If there are multiple affected individuals in a family, it may be possible to perform prenatal diagnosis using a DNA information technique
known as a linkage study.
Hypermobility type
Excessively loose joints are the hallmark of this
EDS type, formerly known as EDS type III. Both large
joints, such as the elbows and knees, and small joints,
such as toes and fingers, are affected. Partial and total
joint dislocations are common, and particularly
involve the jaw, knee, and shoulder. Many individuals
experience chronic limb and joint pain, although x rays
of these joints appear normal. The skin may also
bruise easily. Osteoarthritis is a common occurrence
in adults. EDS hypermobility type is inherited in an
autosomal dominant manner.
There are two major clinical diagnostic criteria for
EDS hypermobility type. These include skin involvement (either hyperextensible skin or smooth and velvety skin) and generalized joint hypermobility. At this
time there is no test for this form of EDS.
Vascular type
Formerly called EDS type IV, EDS vascular type
is the most severe form. The connective tissue in the
intestines, arteries, uterus, and other hollow organs
may be unusually weak, leading to organ or blood
vessel rupture. Such ruptures are most likely between
ages 20 and 40, although they can occur any time, and
may be life-threatening.
There is a classic facial appearance associated
with EDS vascular type. Affected individuals tend to
have large eyes, a thin pinched nose, thin lips, and a
slim body. The skin is thin and translucent, with veins
dramatically visible, particularly across the chest.
The large joints have normal stability, but small
joints in the hands and feet are loose, showing hyperextensibility. The skin bruises easily. Other complications may include collapsed lungs, premature aging of
the skin on the hands and feet, and ruptured arteries
and veins. After surgery there tends to be poor wound
healing, a complication that tends to be frequent and
severe. Pregnancy also carries the risk complications.
During and after pregnancy there is an increased risk
of the uterus rupturing and of arterial bleeding. Due to
the severe complications associated with EDS type IV,
death usually occurs before the fifth decade. A study of
419 individuals with EDS vascular type, completed in
2000, found that the median survival rate was 48 years,
with a range of six to 73 years. EDS vascular type is
inherited in an autosomal dominant manner.
There are four major clinical diagnostic criteria
for EDS vascular type. These include thin translucent skin, arterial/intestinal/uterine fragility or rupture, extensive bruising, and characteristic facial
appearance. EDS vascular type is caused by a change
in the gene COL3A1, which codes for one of the
collagen chains used to build Collage type III.
Laboratory testing is available for this form of EDS. A skin biopsy may be used to demonstrate the
structurally abnormal collagen. This type of biochemical test identifies more than 95% of individuals
with EDS vascular type. Laboratory testing is recommended for individuals with two or more of the
major criteria.
DNA analysis may als be used to identify the
change within the COL3A1 gene. This information
may be helpful for genetic counseling purposes.
Prenatal testing is available for pregnancies in which
an affected parent has been identified and their DNA
mutation is known or their biochemical defect has
been demonstrated.
Kyphoscoliosis type
The major symptoms of kyphoscoliosis type, formerly called EDS type VI, are general joint looseness.
At birth, the muscle tone is poor, and motor skill
development is subsequently delayed. Also, infants
with this type of EDS have an abnormal curvature of
the spine (scoliosis). The scoliosis becomes progressively worse with age, with affected individuals
usually unable to walk by age 20. The eyes and skin
are fragile and easily damaged, and blood vessel
involvement is a possibility. The bones may also be
affected as demonstrated by a decrease in bone mass.
Kyphoscoliosis type is inherited in an autosomal
recessive manner.There are four major clinical diagnostic criteria
for EDS kyphoscoliosis type. These include generaly
loose joints, low muscle tone at birth, scoliosis at birth
(which worsens with age), and a fragility of the eyes,
which may give the white area of the eye a blue tint or
cause the eye to rupture. This form of EDS is caused
by a change in the PLOD gene on chromosome 1,
which encodes the enzyme lysyl hydroxylase. A
laboratory test is available in which urinary hydroxylysyl pryridinoline is measured. This test, performed
on urine is extremely senstive and specific for EDS
kyphoscolios type. Laboratory testing is recommended for infants with three or more of the major
diagnostic criteria.
Prenatal testing is available if a pregnancy is
known to be at risk and an identified affected family
member has had positive laboratory testing. An
amniocentesis may be performed in which fetal cells
are removed from the amniotic fluid and enzyme
activity is measured.
Arthrochalasia type
Dislocation of the hip joint typically accompanies
arthrochalasia type EDS, formerly called EDS type VIIB. Other joints are also unusually loose, leading
to recurrent partial and total dislocations. The skin
has a high degree of stretchability and bruises easily.
Individuals with this type of EDS may also experience
mildly diminished bone mass, scoliosis, and poor
muscle tone. Arthrochalasia type is inherited in an
autosomal dominant manner.
There are two major clinical diagnostic criteria
for EDS arthrochalasia type. These include sever
generalized joing hypermobility and bilateral hip
dislocation present at birth. This form of EDS is
caused by a change in either of two components of
Collage type I, called proa1(I) type A and proa2(I)
type B. A skin biopsy may be preformed to demonstrate an abnormality in either components. Direct
DNA testing is also available.
Dermatosparaxis type
Individuals with this type of EDS, once called type
VIIC, have extremely fragile skin that bruises easily
but does not scar excessively. The skin is soft and may
sag, leading to an aged appearance even in young
adults. Individuals may also experience hernias.
Dermatosparaxis type is inherited in an autosomal
recessive manner.
There are two major clinical diagnostic criteria for
EDS dematosparaxis type. These include severe skin
fragility and sagging or aged appearing skin. This
form of EDS is caused by a change in the enzyme
called procollagen I N-terminal peptidase. A skin
biopsy may be preformed for a definitive diagnosis of
Dermatosparaxis type.
Other types
There are several other forms of EDS that have
not been as clearly defined as the aforementioned
types. Forms of EDS within this category may present
with soft, mildly stretchable skin, shortened bones,
chronic diarrhea, joint hypermobility and dislocation,
bladder rupture, or poor wound healing. Inheritance
patterns within this group include X-linked recessive,
autosomal dominant, and autosomal recessive.
Causes and symptoms
There are numerous types of EDS, all caused by
changes in one of several genes. The manner in which
EDS is inherited depends on the specific gene
involved. There are three patterns of inheritance for
EDS: autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, and
X-linked (extremely rare).
Chromosomes are made up of hundreds of small
units known as genes, which contain the genetic
material necessary for an individual to develop and
function. Humans have 46 chromosomes, which are
matched into 23 pairs. Because chromosomes are
inherited in pairs, each individual receives two
copies of each chromosome and likewise two copies
of each gene.
Changes or mutations in genes can cause
genetic diseases in several different ways, many of
which are represented within the spectrum of EDS.In autosomal dominant EDS, only one copy of a
specific gene must be changed for a person to have EDS. In autosomal recessive EDS, both copies of a
specific gene must be changed for a person to have EDS. If only one copy of an autosomal recessive
EDS gene is changed the person is referred to as a
carrier, meaning they do not have any of the signs
or symptoms of the disease itself, but carry the
possibility of passing on the disorder to a future
child. In X-linked EDS a specific gene on the X
chromosome must be changed. However, this
affects males and females differently because
males and females have a different number of X
chromosomes.
The few X-linked forms of EDS fall under the
category of X-linked recessive. As with autosomal
recessive, this implies that both copies of a specific gene
must be changed for a person to be affected. However,
because males only have one X-chromosome, they
are affected if an X-linked recessive EDS gene is
changed on their single X-chromosome. That is, they
are affected even though they have only one changed
copy. On the other hand, that same gene must be
changed on both of the X-chromosomes in a female
for her to be affected.
Although there is much information regarding the
changes in genes that cause EDS and their various
inheritance patterns, the exact gene mutation for all
types of EDS is not known.
Diagnosis
Clinical symptoms such as extreme joint looseness
and unusual skin qualities, along with family history,
can lead to a diagnosis of EDS. Specific tests, such as
skin biopsies are available for diagnosis of certain
types of EDS, including vascular, arthrochalasia, and
dermatosparaxis types. A skin biopsy involves removing a small sample of skin and examining its microscopic structure. A urine test is available for the
Kyphoscoliosis type.
Management of all types of EDS may include
genetic counseling to help the affected individual and
their family understand the disorder and its impact on
other family members and future children.
If a couple has had a child diagnosed with EDS
the chance that they will have another child with the
same disorder depends on with what form of EDS the
child has been diagnosed and if either parent is
affected by the same disease or not.
Individuals diagnosed with an autosomal dominant form of EDS have a 50% chance of passing the
same disorder on to a child in each pregnancy.
Individuals diagnosed with an autosomal recessive
form of EDS have an extremely low risk of having a
child with the same disorder.
X-linked recessive EDS is accompanied by a
slightly more complicated pattern of inheritance. If
a father with an X-linked recessive form of EDS
passes a copy of his X chromosome to his children,
the sons will be unaffected and the daughters will be
carriers. If a mother is a carrier for an X-linked
recessive form of EDS, she may have affected or
unaffected sons, or carrier or unaffected daughters,
depending on the second sex chromosome inherited
from the father.
Prenatal diagnosis is available for specific forms
of EDS, including kyphosocliosis type and vascular
type. However, prenatal testing is only a possibility in
these types if the underlying defect has been found in
another family member.
Treatment
Medical therapy relies on managing symptoms
and trying to prevent further complications. There is
no cure for EDS.
Braces may be prescribed to stabilize joints,
although surgery is sometimes necessary to repair joint
damage caused by repeated dislocations. Physical
therapy teaches individuals how to strengthen
muscles around joints and may help to prevent or
limit damage. Elective surgery is discouraged due to
the high possibility of complications.
Alternative treatment
There are anecdotal reports that large daily doses
0.04–0.14 oz (1–4 g) of vitamin C may help decrease
bruising and aid in wound healing. Constitutional
homeopathic treatment may be helpful in maintaining optimal health in persons with a diagnosis of EDS. An individual with EDS should discuss these
types of therapies with their doctor before beginning
them on their own. Therapy that does not require
medical consultation involves protecting the skin
with sunscreen and avoiding activities that place
stress on the joints.
Prognosis
The outlook for individuals with EDS depends
on the type of EDS with which they have been
diagnosed. Symptoms vary in severity, even within
one sub-type, and the frequency of complications changes on an individual basis. Some individuals
have negligible symptoms while others are severely
restricted in their daily life. Extreme joint instability
and scoliosis may limit a person’s mobility. Most
individuals will have a normal lifespan. However,
those with blood vessel involvement, particularly
those with EDS vascular type, have an increased
risk of fatal complications.
EDS is a lifelong condition. Affected individuals
may face social obstacles related to their disease on a
daily basis. Some people with EDS have reported living with fears of significant and painful skin ruptures,
becoming pregnant (especially those with EDS vascular type), their condition worsening, becoming unemployed due to physical and emotional burdens, and
social stigmatization in general.
Constant bruises, skin wounds, and trips to the
hospital take their toll on both affected children and
their parents. Prior to diagnosis parents of children
with EDS have found themselves under suspicion of
child abuse.
Some people with EDS are not diagnosed until
well into adulthood and, in the case of EDS vascular
type, occasionally not until after death due to complications of the disorder. Not only may the diagnosis
itself be devastating to the family, but in many cases
other family members find out for the first time they
are at risk for being affected.
Although individuals with EDS face significant
challenges, it is important to remember that each
person is unique with their own distinguished
qualities and potential. Persons with EDS go on to
have families, to have careers, and to be accomplished citizens, surmounting the challenges of their
disease.