Definition
Ehrlichiosis is a bacterial infection that is spread
by ticks. Symptoms include fever, chills, headache,
muscle aches, and tiredness.
Description
Ehrlichiosis is a tick-borne disease caused by
infection with Ehrlichia bacteria. Ticks are small,
blood-sucking arachnids. Although some ticks carry
disease-causing organisms, most do not. When an
animal or person is bitten by a tick that carries
bacteria, the bacteria are passed to that person or
animal during the tick’s feeding process. It is believed
that the tick must remain attached to the person
or animal for at least 24 hours to spread the infection.
There are two forms of ehrlichiosis in the United
States; human monocytic ehrlichiosis and human
granulocytic ehrlichiosis. Monocytic ehrlichiosis is
caused by Ehrlichia chaffeensis, which is spread by
the Lone Star tick, Amblyomma americanum. As of
early 1998, about 400 cases of monocytic ehrlichiosis
had been reported in 30 states, primarily in the southeastern and south central United States. The bacteria
that causes granulocytic ehrlichiosis is not known, but
suspected to be either Ehrlichia equi or Ehrlichia
phagocytophila. Granulocytic ehrlichiosis is probably
spread by the blacklegged tick Ixodes scapularis
(which also spreads Lyme disease). About 100 cases
of granulocytic ehrlichiosis have been reported
in Connecticut, Massachusetts, Rhode Island,
Minnesota, New York, and Wisconsin.
Causes and symptoms
Both forms of ehrlichiosis have similar symptoms,
and the illnesses can range from mild to severe and
life-threatening. Risk factors include old age and
exposure to ticks through work or recreation.
Symptoms occur seven to 21 days following a tick
bite although patients may not recall being bitten.
Fever, tiredness, headache, muscle aches, chills, loss
of appetite, confusion, nausea, and vomiting are
common to both diseases. A rash may occur.
Diagnosis
Ehrlichiosis may be diagnosed and treated by
doctors who specialize in blood diseases (hematologists) or an infectious disease specialist. Because
ehrlichiosis is not very common and the symptoms are
not unique, it may be misdiagnosed. A recent history of
a tick bite is helpful in the diagnosis. Blood tests will be
done to look for antibodies to Ehrlichia. Staining and
microscopic examination of the blood sample may
show Ehrlichia bacteria inside white blood cells.
Another test, called polymerase chain reaction (PCR),
is a very sensitive assay to detect bacteria in the blood
sample, but it is not always available.
Treatment
Antibiotic treatment should begin immediately if
ehrlichiosis is suspected, even if laboratory results are
not available. Treatment with either tetracycline
(Sumycin, Achromycin V) or doxycycline (Monodox,
Vibramycin) is recommended. Many patients with
ehrlichiosis are admitted to the hospital for treatment.
Prognosis
For otherwise healthy people, a full recovery is
expected following treatment for ehrlichiosis. Elderly
patients are at a higher risk for severe disease, which
may be fatal. Serious complications include lung or
gastrointestinal bleeding. Two to 10 patients out of
100 die from the disease.
Prevention
The only prevention for ehrlichiosis is to minimize
exposure to ticks by staying on the trail when walking
through the woods, avoiding tall grasses, wearing long
sleeves and tucking pant legs into socks, wearing insect
repellent, and checking for ticks after an outing.
Remove a tick as soon as possible by grasping the
tick with tweezers and gently pulling.