Definition
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is a medical
treatment for severe mental illness in which a small,
carefully controlled amount of electricity is introduced
into the brain. This electrical stimulation, used in
conjunction with anesthesia and muscle relaxant
medications, produces a mild generalized seizure or
convulsion. While used to treat a variety of psychiatric
disorders, it is most effective in the treatment of severe
depression, and provides the most rapid relief currently available for this illness.
Purpose
The purpose of electroconvulsive therapy is to provide relief from the signs and symptoms of mental
illnesses such as severe depression, mania, and schizophrenia. ECT is indicated when patients need rapid
improvement because they are suicidal, self-injurious,
refuse to eat or drink, cannot or will not take medication
as prescribed, or present some other danger to themselves. Antidepressant medications, while effective in
many cases, may take two–six weeks to produce a therapeutic effect. Antipsychotic medications used to treat
mania and schizophrenia have many uncomfortable and
sometimes dangerous side effects, limiting their use. In
addition, some patients develop allergies and therefore
are unable to take their medicine.
Precautions
The most common risks associated with ECT are
disturbances in heart rhythm. Broken or dislocated
bones occur very rarely.
Description
The treatment of severe mental illness, such as
schizophrenia, using electroconvulsive therapy was
introduced in 1938 by two Italian doctors named
Cerletti and Bini. In those days many doctors believed
that convulsions were incompatible with schizophrenia since, according to their obervations, this disease
rarely occurred in individuals suffering from epilepsy.
They concluded, therefore, that if convulsions could
be artifically produced in patients with schizophrenia,
the illness could be cured. Some doctors were already
using a variety of chemicals to produce seizures, but
many of their patients died or suffered severe injuries
because the strength of the convulsions could not be
well controlled.
Electroconvulsive therapy is among the most
controversial of all procedures used to treat mental
illness. When it was first introduced, many people
were frightened simply because it was called ‘‘shock
treatment.’’ Many assumed the procedure would be
painful, others thought it was a form of electrocution, and still others believed it would cause brain
damage. Unfortunately, unfavorable publicity
in newspapers, magazines, and movies added to
these fears.
Indeed, in those early years, patients and families
were rarely educated by doctors and nurses regarding
this or other forms of psychiatric treatment. In addition,
no anesthesia or muscle relaxants were used. As a result,
patients had violent seizures, and even though they did
not remember them, the procedure itself was frightening.
The way these treatments are given today is very
different from the procedures used in the past. Currently,
ECT is offered on both an inpatient and outpatient basis.
Hospitals have specially equipped rooms with oxygen,
suction, and cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) in
order to deal with the rare emergency.
The treatment is carried out as follows: approximately 30 minutes before the scheduled treatment
time, the patient may receive an injection of a medication (such as atropine) that keeps the pulse rate
from decreasing too much during the convulsion.
Next, the patient is placed on a cot and hooked up to
a machine that automatically takes and displays
vital signs (temperature, pulse, respiration, and
blood pressure) on a television-like monitor. A mild
anesthetic is then injected into a vein, followed by a
medication (such a Anectine) that relaxes all of the
muscles in the body so that the seizure is mild, and the
risk of broken bones is virtually eliminated.
When the patient is both relaxed and asleep, an
airway is placed in the mouth to aid with breathing.
Electrodes are placed on the sides of the head in the
temple areas. An electric current is passed through the
brain by means of a machine specifically designed for
this purpose. The usual dose of electricity is 70–150
volts for 0.1–0.5 seconds. In the first stage of the
seizure (tonic phase), the muscles in the body that
have not been paralyzed by medication contract for a
period of five to 15 seconds. This is followed by the
second stage (clonic phase) that is characterized by
twitching movements, usually visible only in the
toes or in a non-paralyzed arm or leg. These are caused
by alternating contraction and relaxation of these
same muscles. This stage lasts approximately 10–60
seconds. The entire procedure, from beginning to
end, lasts about 30 minutes.
The total number of treatments a patient will receive
depends upon many factors such as age, diagnosis, the
history of illness, family support, and response to therapy. Patients with depression, for example, usually
require six to 12 treatments. Treatments are usually
administered every other day, three times a week.
The electrodes may be placed on both sides of
the head (bilateral) or one side (unilateral). While
bilateral ECT appears to be somewhat more effective, unilateral ECT is preferred for individuals
who experience prolonged confusion or forgetfulness
following treatment. Many doctors begin treatment
with unilateral ECT, then change to bilateral if the
patient is not improving.
Post-treatment confusion and forgetfulness are
common, though disturbing symptoms associated
with ECT. Doctors and nurses must be patient and
supportive by providing patients with factual information about recovery. Elderly patients, for example,
may become increasingly confused and forgetful
as the treatments continue. These symptoms usually
subside with time, but a small minority of patients
state that they have never fully recovered from these
effects.
With the introduction of antipsychotics in the
1950s, the use of ECT became less frequent. These
new medications provided relief for untold thousands
of patients who suffered greatly from their illness.
However, there are a number of side effects associated
with these drugs, some of which are irreversible.
Another drawback is that some medications do not
produce a therapeutic effect for two–six weeks. During
this time the patient may present a danger to himself
or others. In addition, there are patients who do not
respond to medicine or who have severe allergic
reactions. For these individuals, ECT may be the
only treatment that will help.
Preparation
Patients and relatives are prepared for ECT by
being shown video tapes that explain both the procedure and the risks involved. The physician then
answers any questions these individuals may have,
and the patient is asked to sign an ‘‘Informed
Consent Form.’’ This gives the doctor and the hospital
permission to administer the treatment.
Once the form is signed, the doctor performs a
complete physical examination, and orders a number
of tests that can help identify any potential problem.
These tests may include a chest x ray, an electrocardiogram (ECG), urinalysis, spinal x ray, brain wave
(EEG), and complete blood count (CBC).
Some medications, such as lithium and a type of
antidepressant known as monoamine oxidase inhibitors, should be discontinued for some time before
treatment. Patients are instructed not to eat or drink
for at least eight hours prior to the procedure in order
to reduce the possibility of vomiting and choking.
Aftercare
After the treatment, patients are moved to a
recovery area. Vital signs are recorded every five minutes until the patient is fully awake, which may take
15–30 minutes. Some initial confusion may be present
but usually disappears in a matter of minutes. There may be complaints of headache, muscle pain, or back
pain. Such discomfort is quickly relieved by mild medications such as aspirin.
Risks
Advanced medical technology has substantially
reduced the complications associated with ECT.
These include slow heart beat (bradycardia), rapid
heart beat (tachycardia), memory loss, and confusion.
Persons at high risk for ECT include those with recent
heart attack, uncontrolled blood pressure, brain
tumors, and previous spinal injuries.
Normal results
ECT often produces dramatic improvement in the
signs and symptoms of major depression, especially in
elderly individuals, sometimes during the first week of
treatment. While it is estimated that 50% of these
patients will experience a future return of symptoms,
the prognosis for each episode of illness is good. Mania
also often responds well to treatment. The picture is not
as bright for schizophrenia, which is more difficult to
treat and is characterized by frequent relapses.
A few patients are placed on maintenance ECT.
This means they return to the hospital every one–two
months, as needed, for an additional treatment. These
individuals are thus able to keep their illness under
control and lead a normal and productive life.