Definition
Electrical stimulation of the brain (ESB) is a
relatively new technique used to treat chronic pain
and tremors associated with Parkinson disease. ESB
is administered by passing an electrical current
through an electrode implanted in the brain.
Purpose
While the implantation of electrodes in the brain
is used to treat or diagnose several disorders, the term
ESB is limited here to the treatment of tremors, and
as a pain management tool for patients suffering
from back problems and other chronic injuries and
illnesses.
Precautions
An ESB tremor control device, used in treating
Parkinson patients, may interfere with or be affected
by cardiac pacemakers and other medical equipment.
As a result, patients with other implanted medical
equipment may not be good candidates for the therapy.
Description
Electrical stimulation of the brain, or deep brain
stimulation, is effective in treating tremor in up to
88% of Parkinson disease patients. An electrode is
implanted into the thalamus (part of the brain) of the
patient, and attached to an electric pulse generator via
an extension wire. The pulse generator is implanted
into the patient’s pectoral, or chest area, and the
extension wire is tunneled under the skin. The pulse
generator sends out intermittent electrical stimulation
to the electrode in the thalamus, which inhibits or
partially relieves the tremor. The generator can be
turned on and off with a magnet, and needs to be
replaced every three to five years.
Similar methods have been used to treat chronic
pain that responded unfavorably to conventional
therapies. A remote transmitter allows these patients
to trigger electric stimulation to relieve their symptoms on an as-needed basis. Patients with failed back
syndrome, trigeminal neuropathy (pertaining to the
fifth cranial nerve), and peripheral neuropathy fared
well for pain control with this treatment, while
patients with spinal cord injury and postherpetic
neuralagia (pain along the nerves following herpes)
did poorly.
Preparation
The patient should be free of any type of infection
before undergoing an ESB procedure. He or she
may be advised to discontinue any medication for a
prescribed period of time before surgery.
Aftercare
After neurosurgery, patients should undergo
regular head dressing changes, minimize exposure to
others, and practice good personal hygiene in order
to prevent a brain infection. The head may also be kept
elevated for a prescribed period of time in order to
decrease swelling of the brain.
Risks
The implantation of electrodes into the brain
carries risks of hemorrhage, infarction, infection, and
cerebral edema. These complications could cause
irreversible neurological damage.
Patients with an implanted ESB tremor control
device may experience headaches, disequilibrium
(a disturbance of the sense of balance), burning or
tingling of the skin, or partial paralysis.
Normal results
ESB is effective in pain control for specific conditions. It can provide long-term pain relief with few side
effects or complications.
For the control of tremors a deep brain stimulator
does provide some relief. It is recommended for
patients with tremors severe enough to affect their
quality of life.