Definition
Electrolyte supplements are a varied group of
prescription and nonprescription preparations used
to correct imbalances in the body’s electrolyte levels.
Electrolytes themselves are substances that dissociate
into ions (electrically charged atoms or atom groups)
when they melt or are dissolved, thus serving to conduct electricity. In the human body, electrolytes are
thus critical to the proper distribution of water, muscle
contraction and expansion, transmission of nerve
impulses, delivery of oxygen to body tissues, heart
rate and rhythm, acid-base balance, and other important functions or conditions.
The ions that are formed when electrolytes are
dissolved in body fluids are either positively or negatively charged. Positively charged ions are called
cations, and are formed when an atom or atom
group loses electrons. The most important cations in
the human body are sodium, potassium, magnesium,
and calcium ions. Negatively charged ions are called
anions, and are formed when an atom or atom group
gains electrons. The principal anions in the body
include bicarbonate, chloride, phosphate, and sulfate
ions, as well as ions formed by certain protein
compounds or organic acids.
About 60 percent of an adult human male’s total
body weight is water. In adult women, the figure is
about 55 percent, and is even lower in the elderly and
in obese people. Two-thirds of total body water
(TBW) lies inside cells and is known as intracellular
fluid or ICF. The remaining third of TBW lies outside
the cells andis called extracellular fluid orECF.About 75
percent of ECF lies in connective tissue or the spaces
between tissues outside the blood vessels (interstitial spaces), while the remaining 25 percent is within the
blood vessels. In addition to representing different proportions of TBW, ICF and ECF differ significantly in
their electrolyte content. Whereas the major cation in
ICF is potassium, the most important cation in ECF is
sodium. These differences in electrolyte levels help to
regulate the movement of water between ICF and ECF.
Children are more vulnerable than adults to fluid
and electrolyte imbalances, in part because they have
different ratios of TBW to total body weight, and of
ICF to ECF. A newborn baby carried to full term has
a TBW ratio between 75 and 80 percent. The baby’s
total body water ratio decreases by 4– 5 percent during
the first week after birth and reaches the adult level of
60 percent by twelve months of age. Similarly, a newborn has an ICF: ECF ratio of 55: 45, which falls to the
adult ratio of 70: 30 during the first year of life. In
addition to these different fluid ratios, children’s kidneys are less efficient than adults in regulating water
balance; children have smaller organ systems that dissipate body heat less efficiently; and their core body
temperature rises faster than that of an adult when
they become dehydrated. All these factors help to
explain why some electrolyte supplements are formulated specifically for children.
Purpose
The purpose of electrolyte supplements is to
restore the proper ratio of total body water to total
body weight and the correct proportions of the various
electrolytes in body fluids. Electrolyte imbalances may
result from excessive intake or inadequate elimination
of electrolytes on the one hand or by insufficient
intake or excessive elimination on the other hand.
Body regulation of water and electrolytes
Under normal conditions, the water and electrolyte content of the body is regulated by the kidneys, the
secretion of antidiuretic hormone, and the sensation
of thirst. The average adult needs to take in about
700–800 mL (about 1.5–1.7 pints) of water per day in
order to match the water lost through perspiration,
breathing, and excretion of waste products. The water
that is taken in by mouth is added to the 200–300 mL
(0.42–0.63 pints) of water that are formed in the body
each day through tissue breakdown.
The amount of water needed to match fluid losses,
however, may be considerably greater than the average
during exercise or in patients with fever, severe vomiting,
ordiarrhea.Adults with fever typicallylose an additional
.75–1.0 ounces of fluid per day for each degree that their
temperature rises above normal. With regard to
diarrhea, adults with cholera have been reported to lose
as much as a quart of fluid per hour in their stools. The
fluid lost in this way also contains sodium, potassium,
and chloride, resulting in electrolyte imbalances in cholera patients as well as dehydration.
Exercise raises the total metabolism of the body to
5–15 times the resting rate. Most of this energy (70–90
percent) is released as heat, which is partially dissipated by the evaporation of sweat. Depending on
weather conditions, the type and weight of clothing
being worn, and the intensity of exercise or physical
work performed, adults may lose anywhere from 1 to
2.5 quarts of fluid per hour through perspiration.
Sweat, however, contains sodium chloride as well as
smaller amounts of potassium, calcium, and magnesium. In order to maintain the proper balance of
electrolytes in the body as well as fluid, athletes or
people employed in outdoor work during warm
weather may need to replace the electrolytes lost in
sweat by taking capsules or drinking beverages
containing supplemental electrolytes.
With regard to the sense of thirst, it is not always
an accurate indication of the body’s need for water.
Researchers have found that many people do not feel
thirsty until they have already lost about 2 percent of
their total body weight through fluid losses. As a
result, most people will not replace enough fluid
during exercise or hot weather simply by drinking
water until they no longer feel thirsty. In addition,
the aging process, certain mental disorders, or drugs
may affect a person’s sense of thirst.
At the other extreme of water intake, a person
may drink excessive amounts of water due to misunderstandings about their need for extra fluid during
exercise. This condition is known as water intoxication
or hyperhydration. It leads to abnormally low levels of
sodium in the blood, a condition known as hyponatremia. Water intoxication may lead to swelling of the
brain, confusion, disorientation, and eventually coma
or death. Several marathon runners have died from
water intoxication since 2002, as have teenagers who
consumed large amounts of water after taking doses of
Ecstasy (MDMA), a so-called ‘‘club drug.’’ Other
persons at risk for water intoxication include people
with eating disorders and children with mental retardation. An important article published in the New
England Journal of Medicine in April 2005 reported
that as many as 13 percent of marathon runners developed hyponatremia during the course of a race as a
result of dr! inking too much water, usually 3 quarts or
more. Female athletes appear to be at greater risk of
water intoxication and hyponatremia than male
athletes. Conditions associated with fluid and electrolyte
imbalance
The most common conditions leading to fluid and
electrolyte imbalance are as follows:
 Exposure to extended periods of extremely hot
weather.
 High levels of athletic activity, military training, or
outdoor work in such fields as construction, agriculture, forestry, fishing, and certain types of
manufacturing.
 Extreme changes in diet.
 Reduced fluid intake.
 Medication side effects. Certain drugs, particularly
diuretics, beta-blockers, and vasodilators, may
increase the loss of electrolytes in urine and/or interfere with the body’s ability to regulate its temperature during exercise or in hot weather.
 Severe illnesses characterized by high fever, recurrent
diarrhea, and/or frequent vomiting. Such illnesses
include cholera, viral gastroenteritis (‘‘stomach
flu’’), shigellosis, and amebic dysentery.
 Severe burns covering more than 10 percent of the
body.
 Surgical creation of a stoma or urinary diversion.
These operations sometimes lead to an increased
loss of body fluids while the patient’s body is adjusting to the changes in urination and excretion resulting from the surgery. In addition, some forms of
weight loss surgery intended to bypass parts of the
small intestine in which food absorption occurs have
a 70-percent rate of electrolyte imbalances as a complication of the operation.
 Diseases affecting the kidneys. These include diabetes mellitus, diabetes insipidus, and syndrome of
inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion
(SIADH) as well as cancer or infections of the
kidneys.
 In infants, premature birth.
Description
The various electrolyte supplements used in the
United States and Canada as of 2005 are intended to
prevent or treat electrolyte imbalances in very different situations or groups of patients. They range from
sports drinks and other supplements used by amateur
or professional athletes to prevent muscle cramps and
improve athletic performance, to liquids used at home
to prevent dehydration in children with diarrhea, to
injections administered as part of enteral (feeding
through a tube or stoma directly into the small intestine) or parenteral nutrition (intravenous feeding that
bypasses the digestive tract).
The major categories of electrolyte supplements
are as follows:
 Sports drinks. Sports drinks are beverages specially
formulated to contain appropriate amounts of electrolytes and carbohydrates as well as water to replace
the fluid and sodium lost through sweat during
athletic activities. These beverages are popular with
athletes at the college level, being used by about 3
/4 of
the students on varsity teams at major universities.
According to the American College of Sports
Medicine as well as American and Canadian dietitians’ associations, sports drinks are effective in
supplying food energy for the muscles, maintaining
proper levels of blood sugar, maintaining the proper
functioning of the thirst mechanism, and lowering
the risk of dehydration or hyponatremia. Other
researchers have noted that the flavoring added to
sports drinks encourages athletes to drink more during periods of exercise and thus maintain proper
levels of hydration. Sports drinks can be purchased
in supermarkets as well as health food stores; they
include such well! -known beverages as Gatorade,
Lucozade, Red Devil, Powerade, and Red Alert.
Some of these popular supplements come in a semisolid form known as energy gels, some of which
contain caffeine or various herbal compounds as
well as carbohydrates and electrolytes.
 Over-the-counter powders and tablets. Some athletes–particularly those who participate in such
sports as long-distance running or endurance
cycling—prefer capsules or concentrated powders
to maintain their electrolyte balance during exercise.
The powders are mixed with 12 or 16 ounces of cold
water prior to drinking, while the capsules can be
taken before, during, and after exercise. Most contain flavorings to mask the naturally salty or bitter
taste of the electrolytes themselves. Common brand
names include eForce, NutriBiotic, and Endurolytes;
prices range from $11 for 100 capsules to $35 for a
30-serving jar of powder. These products are
regarded by the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) as dietary supplements.
 Over-the-counter electrolyte replenishers for children. As has been mentioned earlier, infants and
young children are more vulnerable to dehydration
than adults, particularly from severe gastroenteritis
or diarrhea. A child may become dehydrated in less
than a day from recurrent vomiting or episodes of
diarrhea. Some doctors recommend that parents keep oral rehydration fluids containing mixtures of
carbohydrates and electrolytes specially formulated
for children in the medicine chest at home in case the
child becomes dehydrated from a stomach virus or
similar illness. Common brand names for these products, which are regulated by the FDA as ‘‘medical
foods,’’ include Pedialyte, Infalyte, Naturalyte, and
Rehydralyte. Most come in a powdered form to be
mixed with water as well as liquid forms; Pedialyte is
also available as fruit-flavored freezer pops. Typical
prices range from $6 for a box of 16 freezer pops to
$34 for a quart of oral electrolyte solution.
 Oral rehydration formulae for children and adults.
Oral rehydration salts, which are also known as
ORS, have been a staple of treatment for cholera
and other diseases accompanied by severe diarrhea
in developing countries for almost half a century.
First researched in the 1940s, oral rehydration salts
were adopted by the World Health Organization
(WHO) in 1978 in order to reduce the risk of death
from dehydration caused by cholera-related diarrhea. Since the introduction of ORS, the number of
children around the world who die from acute
diarrhea has been reduced from 5 million per year
to 1.3 million. Reformulated by WHO in 2002, the
ORS salts come in packets to be kept in the home and
mixed with water as soon as a child (or adult) falls ill.
The new formula is a low-glucose and low-sodium
mixture. If the WHO packets are unavailable, a
comparable form of oral rehydration solution can
be made by adding 8 tsp of table sugar, 1
/2 tsp of
salt, 1
/2 tsp of baking soda (bicarbona! te of soda),
and 1/3 tsp of potassium chloride to a liter (1.05
quarts) of water. In an emergency, a solution prepared from 1 tbsp of sugar and 1
/2 tsp of salt added to
1 liter of water can be used to treat diarrhea.
 Multiple electrolyte injections. Various mixtures of
electrolytes are available by prescription in injectable
form to be added to enteral or parenteral nutrition
formulae. These forms of feeding are used in patients
who require supplementation or complete replacement
of feeding by mouth, including patients with various
intestinal disorders, AIDS, or severe burns. Basic solutions fortotal parenteral nutrition, or TPN, contain the
electrolytes sodium, potassium, chloride, phosphate,
and magnesium, although the exact proportion of
electrolytes can be tailored to an individual patient’s
needs. Some injectable formulae contain dextrose, a
sugar, and acetate or lactate as well as the five major
electrolytes. Common brand names include Hyperlite,
TPN Electrolytes, Lypholyte, Nutrilyte, Plasma-Lyte
148, and others. Some patients are taught to use these
injectable formulae at home.
Recommended dosage
Recommended dosages for electrolyte supplements are as follows:
 Sports drinks. Since sports drinks and energy gels are
not medications in the strict sense, the amount
consumed will vary not only from person to person
but also in a given individual from day to day
depending on weather conditions, level of athletic
conditioning, length of activity, and other factors.
To lower the risk of dehydration in adults in hot
weather, the American College of Sports Medicine
recommends taking 20 ounces of a sports drink 2–3
hours before exercising; another 10 ounces 20 minutes before exercising; 10 ounces every 10–20 minutes
during exercise; and 20 ounces per pound of weight
lost during exercise after the activity is over. A group
of researchers at Texas A & M University suggests
that athletes competing in endurance events should
drink about 500 mL (1 pint) of a sports drink containing 4–8 percent of carbohydrates and electrolytes
1–2 hours before an event. For events lasting longer
than an hour, they should drink be! tween 600 and
1200 mL (1.25 to 2.5 pints) per hour of a sports drink
containing carbohydrate plus 0.5–0.7 grams of
sodium per quart.
 Over-the-counter powders and tablets. The usual
recommended dose of powdered electrolytes is one
scoopful (or prepackaged envelope) of powder dissolved in 12–16 ounces of water before exercising.
Capsules may be taken as follows: 1–3 capsules
30–60 minutes before exercising; 1–6 capsules per
hour during the workout; and 1–3 capsules after
exercising.
 Over-the-counter electrolyte replenishers for children.
Dosages for Pedialyte and similar oral rehydration
solutions for children are usually based on the child’s
age and weight. The child’s doctor should determine
the quantity to be given if the child is younger than
12 months of age. Children between the ages of 1 and
2 years are usually given 34 mL of electrolyte solution
per pound of body weight during the first eight hours
of treatment and 75 mL per pound of body weight
during the next 16 hours, although the doctor may
adjust the dose if the child is very thirsty. Children
between the ages of 2 and 10 are given 23 mL of
electrolyte solution per pound of body weight for the
first four to six hours of treatment, followed by 45 mL
per pound taken over the next 18–24 hours. Freezer
pops may be given to children older than 1 year as
often as the child desires.
 Oral rehydration formulae. The WHO form of oral
rehydration liquid is made by adding the full contents of one packet of powdered oral rehydration
salts to a quart of drinking water. The solution
should not be boiled. A fresh quart of solution
should be mixed each day. Infants and young children should be given the solution in small amounts
by spoon as often as possible. Adults and teenagers
should take the WHO formula according to the
doctor’s directions.
 Multiple electrolyte injections. Basic TPN solutions
are usually made up in liter batches and adjusted to
each individual patient’s needs. The standard adult
dosage is 2 liters per day, usually administered by
drip through a needle or catheter placed in the
patient’s vein for a 10–12-hour period once a day or
5 days per week. The patient may be given several
units of premixed TPN fluid to store at home in the
refrigerator or freezer. Each dose should be taken
from the refrigerator 4–6 hours prior to use to
allow it to warm to room temperature. TPN solution
stored in a freezer should be moved to a refrigerator
24 hours before use.
Precautions
 Sports drinks. Sports drinks should not be given to
rehydrate children with vomiting or diarrhea, as they
do not contain the proper balance of carbohydrates
and electrolytes needed by children’s bodies.
 Over-the-counter powders and tablets. These products should always be taken with adequate amounts
of water and kept out of the reach of children.
 Over-the-counter electrolyte replenishers for children. These preparations should be stored out of
the reach of children and away from heat and direct
sunlight. In addition, they should not be given to
patients with intestinal blockage.
 Oral rehydration formulae. WHO oral rehydration
salts and packets of similar formulae should not be
stored in damp places, as moisture can cause the contents to lose their effectiveness. These products should
also be kept away from heat or direct sunlight.
Unused oral rehydration solution should be discarded
at the end of each day. As with electrolyte replenishers
for children, oral rehydration formulae should not be
given to patients with intestinal blockage.
 Multiple electrolyte injections. Patients using multiple electrolyte injections as part of total parenteral
nutrition should have their blood and urine checked
at regular intervals while they are receiving these
medicines. They should also be taught to recognize
the signs of infection at the injection site (pain, swelling, redness, or a cold sensation). In addition, these
patients should not use sports drinks, other electrolyte supplements, or over-the-counter medications
(including herbal preparations) without consulting
their doctor. The injections should not be used if
the fluid looks cloudy, has solid particles floating in
it, or has separated. The injections should be stored
away from sunlight and moisture. In addition,
patients receiving multiple electrolyte injections
should not stop them suddenly without telling their
doctor, as the dosage may need to be reduced slowly
before the TPN is discontinued.
Side effects
 Sports drinks. Some persons do not like the salty
taste of many sports drinks. They may wish to consider products containing glycine, which is an amino
acid that neutralizes the salty taste of the electrolytes
themselves. A more serious side effect of sports
drinks, however, is tooth decay. An article published
by researchers at the University of Maryland Dental
School in 2005 showed that sports drinks erode tooth
enamel at a rate three to 11 times faster than colabased soft drinks.
 Over-the-counter powders and tablets. No side
effects have been reported for these products.
 Over-the-counter electrolyte replenishers for
children. Side effects may include allergic reactions,
including hives, swelling of the face or hands, trouble breathing, tingling in the mouth or throat.
Other side effects may include signs of too much
sodium in the body, such as dizziness, seizures,
muscle twitching, or restlessness. The doctor
should be notified at once if any of these side effects
occur. A less serious side effect that occurs in some
children is mild vomiting.
 Oral rehydration formulae. May produce the same
side effects as electrolyte replenishers for children.
 Multiple electrolyte injections. Minor side effects
may include increased frequency of urination, dry
mouth, increased thirst, or drowsiness. Serious side
effects include rapid weight gain, yellowing of the
skin or eyes, fruity odor on the breath, numbness or
tingling in the hands or feet, uneven heartbeat, shortness of breath, confusion, or weakness with muscle
twitching. Patients should notify their doctor at once
if they notice any of these side effects.
Interactions
 Sports drinks. Sports drinks may raise blood electrolyte levels in patients receiving total parenteral
nutrition.
 Over-the-counter powders and tablets. No interactions have been reported.
 Over-the-counter electrolyte replenishers for children. Children receiving premixed forms of these
preparations should not eat food with added salt or
drink fruit juices until the diarrhea has stopped.
 Oral rehydration formulae for adults. No interactions with other medications have been reported;
however, the doctor should be informed of all other
medications that the patient is taking in case a dosage
adjustment may be necessary.
 Multiple electrolyte injections. Sports drinks and
other electrolyte supplements may raise total blood
electrolyte levels in patients receiving these
injections.