Definition
Electromyography (EMG) is an electrical recording of muscle activity that aids in the diagnosis of
neuromuscular disease.
Purpose
Muscles are stimulated by signals from nerve cells
called motor neurons. This stimulation causes electrical activity in the muscle, which in turn causes contraction. This electrical activity is detected by a needle
electrode inserted into the muscle and connected to a
recording device. Together, the electrode and recorder
are called an electromyography machine. EMG can
determine whether a particular muscle is responding
appropriately to stimulation, and whether a muscle
remains inactive when not stimulated.
EMG is performed most often to help diagnose
different diseases causing weakness. Although EMG is
a test of the motor system, it may help identify
abnormalities of nerves or spinal nerve roots that
may be associated with pain or numbness. Other symptoms for which EMG may be useful include numbness,
atrophy, stiffness, fasciculation, cramp, deformity,
and spasticity. EMG results can help determine
whether symptoms are due to a muscle disease or a
neurological disorder, and, when combined with clinical findings, usually allow a confident diagnosis.
EMG can help diagnose many muscle and nerve
disorders, including:
 muscular dystrophy
 congenital myopathies
 mitochondrial myopathies
 metabolic myopathies
 myotonias
 peripheral neuropathies
 radiculopathies
 nerve lesions
 amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
 polio
 spinal muscular atrophy
 Guillain-Barre´ syndrome
 ataxias
 myasthenias
Precautions
No special precautions are needed for this test.
Patients with a history of bleeding disorder should
consult with their treating physician before the test.
If a muscle biopsy is planned as part of the diagnostic
work-up, EMG should not be performed at the same
site, as it may effect the microscopic appearance of the
muscle.
Description
During an EMG test, a fine needle is inserted into
the muscle to be tested. This may cause some discomfort, similar to that of an injection. Recordings are
made while the muscle is at rest, and then during the
contraction. The person performing the test may move
the limb being tested, and direct the patient to move it
with various levels of force. The needle may be repositioned in the same muscle for further recording. Other
muscles may be tested as well. A typical session lasts
from 30–60 minutes.
A slightly different test, the nerve conduction
velocity test, is often performed at the same time
with the same equipment. In this test, stimulating
and recording electrodes are used, and small electrical shocks are applied to measure the ability of the
nerve to conduct electrical signals. This test may
cause mild tingling and discomfort similar to a mild
shock from static electricity. Evoked potentials
may also be performed for additional diagnostic
information. Nerve conduction velocity and evoked
potential testing are especially helpful when pain or
sensory complaints are more prominent than
weakness.
Preparation
No special preparation is needed. The doctor
supervising and interpreting the test should be given
information about the symptoms, medical conditions,
suspected diagnosis, neuroimaging studies, and other
test results.
Aftercare
Minor pain and bleeding may continue for several
hours after the test. The muscle may be tender for a
day or two.
Risks
There are no significant risks to this test, other
than those associated with any needle insertion (pain,
bleeding, bruising, or infection).
Normal results
There should be some brief EMG activity during
needle insertion. This activity may be increased in
diseases of the nerve and decreased in long-standing
muscle disorders where muscle tissue is replaced by
fibrous tissue or fat. Muscle tissue normally shows
no EMG activity when at rest or when moved passively by the examiner. When the patient actively
contracts the muscle, spikes (motor unit action
potentials) should appear on the recording screen,
reflecting the electrical activity within. As the muscle
is contracted more forcefully, more groups of muscle
fibers are recruited or activated, causing more EMG
activity.
Abnormal results
The interpretation of EMG results is not a simple
matter, requiring analysis of the onset, duration,
amplitude, and other characteristics of the spike
patterns.
Electrical activity at rest is abnormal; the particular pattern of firing may indicate denervation (for
example, a nerve lesion, radiculopathy, or lower
motor neuron degeneration), myotonia, or inflammatory myopathy.
Decreases in the amplitude and duration of spikes
are associated with muscle diseases, which also show
faster recruitment of other muscle fibers to compensate for weakness. Recruitment is reduced in nerve
disorders.