Definition
Electric shock injuries are caused by lightning or
electric current from a mechanical source passing
through the body.
Description
Electric shocks are responsible for about 1,000
deaths in the United States each year, or about 1%
of all accidental deaths.
Causes and symptoms
The severity of injury depends on the current’s
pressure (voltage), the amount of current (amperage), the type of current (direct vs. alternating), the
body’s resistance to the current, the current’s path
through the body, and how long the body remains
in contact with the current. The interplay of these
factors can produce effects ranging from barely
noticeable tingling to instant death; every part of the
body is vulnerable. Although the severity of injury
is determined primarily by the voltage, low voltage
can be just as dangerous as high voltage under the
right circumstances. People have been killed by
shocks of just 50 volts.
How electric shocks affect the skin is determined
by the skin’s resistance, which in turn is dependent
upon the wetness, thickness, and cleanliness of the
skin. Thin or wet skin is much less resistant than
thick or dry skin. When skin resistance is low, the
current may cause little or no skin damage but severely
burn internal organs and tissues. Conversely, high skin
resistance can produce severe skin burns but prevent
the current from entering the body.
The nervous system (the brain, spinal cord, and
nerves) is particularly vulnerable to injury. In fact,
neurological problems are the most common kind of
nonlethal harm suffered by electric shock victims.
Some neurological damage is minor and clears up on
its own or with medical treatment, but some is severe
and permanent. Neurological problems may be apparent immediately after the accident, or gradually
develop over a period of up to three years.
Damage to the respiratory and cardiovascular
systems is most acute at the moment of injury.
Electric shocks can paralyze the respiratory system
or disrupt heart action, causing instant death. Also
at risk are the smaller veins and arteries, which dissipate heat less easily than the larger blood vessels and
can develop blood clots. Damage to the smaller vessels
is probably one reason why amputation is often
required following high-voltage injuries.
Many other sorts of injuries are possible after
an electric shock, including cataracts, kidney failure,
and substantial destruction of muscle tissue. The
victim may suffer a fall or be hit by debris from
exploding equipment. An electric arc may set
clothing or nearby flammable substances on fire.
Strong shocks are often accompanied by violent
muscle spasms that can break and dislocate bones.
These spasms can also freeze the victim in place and
prevent him or her from breaking away from the
source of the current.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis relies on gathering information about
the circumstances of the accident, a thorough physical
examination, and monitoring of cardiovascular and
kidney activity. The victim’s neurological condition
can fluctuate rapidly and requires close observation.
A computed tomography scan (CT scan) or magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) may be necessary to check
for brain injury.
Treatment
When an electric shock accident happens at
home or in the workplace, the main power should
immediately be shut off. If that cannot be done,
and current is still flowing through the victim, the
alternative is to stand on a dry, nonconducting
surface such as a folded newspaper, flattened cardboard carton, or plastic or rubber mat and use a
nonconducting object such as a wooden broomstick (never a damp or metallic object) to push
the victim away from the source of the current.
The victim and the source of the current must
not be touched while the current is still flowing,
for this can electrocute the rescuer. Emergency
medical help should be summoned as quickly as
possible. People who are trained to perform cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) should, if appropriate, begin first aid while waiting for emergency
medical help to arrive.
Burn victims usually require treatment at a burn
center. Fluid replacement therapy is necessary to
restore lost fluids and electrolytes. Severely injured
tissue is repaired surgically, which can involve skin
grafting or amputation. Antibiotics and antibacterial
creams are used to prevent infection. Victims may
also require treatment for kidney failure. Following
surgery, physical therapy to facilitate recovery, and
psychological counseling to cope with disfigurement,
may be necessary.
Prognosis
Electric shocks cause death in 3–15% of cases.
Many survivors require amputation or are disfigured
by their burns. Injuries from household appliances
and other low-voltage sources are less likely to produce extreme damage.
Prevention
Parents and other adults need to be alert to possible electric dangers in the home. Damaged electric
appliances, wiring, cords, and plugs should be
repaired or replaced. Electrical repairs should be
attempted only by people with the proper training.
Hair dryers, radios, and other electric appliances
should never be used in the bathroom or anywhere
else they might accidentally come in contact with
water. Young children need to be kept away from
electric appliances and should be taught about the
dangers of electricity as soon as they are old enough.
Electric outlets require safety covers in homes with
young children.
During thunderstorms, people should go indoors
immediately, even if no rain is falling, and boaters
should return to shore as rapidly as possible. People
who cannot reach indoor shelter should move away
from metallic objects such as golf clubs and fishing
rods and lie down in low-ground areas. Standing or
lying under or next to tall or metallic structures is
unsafe. An automobile is appropriate cover, as
long as the radio is off. Telephones, computers,
hair dryers, and other appliances that can act as
conduits for lightning should not be used during
thunderstorms.