Definition
Electronic fetal monitoring (EFM) is a method for
examining the condition of a baby in the uterus by
noting any unusual changes in its heart rate.
Electronic fetal monitoring is performed late in pregnancy or continuously during labor to ensure normal
delivery of a healthy baby. EFM can be utilized either
externally or internally in the womb.
Purpose
The heart rate of a fetus undergoes constant
adjustment as it responds to its environment and
other stimuli. The fetal monitor records an unborn
baby’s heart rate and graphs it on a piece of paper.
Electronic fetal monitoring is usually advised for highrisk pregnancies, when the baby is in danger of distress. Specific reasons for EFM include: babies in a
breech position, premature labor, and induced labor,
among others.
When electronic fetal monitoring was originally
introduced in the 1960s and 1970s, the hope was that it
would help physicians diagnose fetal hypoxia, or lack
of oxygen, in time to prevent damage to the baby. This
lack of oxygen, also known as perinatal asphyxia or
birth asphyxia, is an important cause of stillbirth and
newborn deaths. It occurs when there are less than
normal amounts of oxygen delivered to the body or
an organ and there is build-up of carbon dioxide in the
body or tissue. A lack of blood flow to an organ can
cause asphyxia. Perinatal asphyxia can occur a long
time before birth, shortly before birth, during delivery,
or after birth. If the interruption to the supply of
oxygen is short, the baby may recover without any
damage. If the time is longer, there may be some injury
that is reversible. If the time period without oxygen is
very long, there may be permanent injury to one or
more organs of the body. It is important to detect any
signs of asphyxia as soon as possible. One of the signs
is an abnormal heart rate and rhythm in the unborn
baby, which can be detected by electronic fetal
monitoring.
The fetal monitor is a more intricate version of the
machine that a health care provider uses to listen to a
baby’s heartbeat. The monitor that is used during
prenatal visits just picks up the sound of the baby’s
heart beating. The fetal monitor also keeps a continuous paper record of the heart rate. In addition, the fetal
monitor can record uterine contractions on the lower
part of the paper strip. This helps the doctor or midwife
determine how a baby is handling the stress of contractions. The normal pattern is for the baby’s heartbeat to
drop slightly during a contraction and then go back to
normal after the contraction is over. EFM looks for any
changes from this normal pattern, particularly if there
is a drastic drop in the baby’s heart beat or if the heart
rate does not recover immediately after a contraction.
Because it is an indirect test, it is not perfect. When
an adult complains to a provider about not feeling
well, checking the heart rate is only one of many things
that the doctor will do. With an unborn baby, however, checking the heart rate is basically the only thing
that a doctor or midwife can do.
Fetal monitoring can be helpful in a variety of
different situations. During pregnancy, fetal monitoring can be used as a part of antepartum testing. If the
practitioner feels that a baby may be at increased risk
of problems toward the end of pregnancy, a baby can
be checked every week or every other week with a nonstress test. In this test, changes in the baby’s heart rate
are measured along with the fetus’ own movements.
The heart rate of a healthy baby should go up whenever she or he moves.
Fetal monitoring is used on and off during early
labor. As labor progresses, more monitoring is often
needed. Usually, as the time for delivery nears, the
monitor is left on continuously since the end of labor
tends to be the most stressful time for the baby.
A baby who is having trouble in labor will show
characteristic changes in heart rate after a contraction
(late decelerations). If a baby is not receiving enough
oxygen to withstand the stress of labor and delivery is
many hours away, a cesarean section (C-section) may
be necessary.
Description
Using the external fetal monitor is simple and
painless. Two elastic belts are placed around the
mother’s abdomen. One belt holds a listening device
in place while the other belt holds the contraction
monitor. The nurse or midwife adjusts the belts to
get the best readings from each device.
Sometimes, it is difficult to hear the baby’s heartbeat with the external monitoring device. Other times,
the monitor may show subtle signs of a developing
problem. In either case, the doctor or midwife may
recommend that the external belt be replaced with an
internal monitor.
The internal monitor is an electronic wire that
rests directly on the baby’s head. The provider can
place it on the baby’s head during an internal exam.
The internal monitor can only be used when the cervix
is already open. This device provides a more accurate
record of the baby’s heart rate.
Preparation
There are no special preparations needed for fetal
monitoring.
Risks
External EFM poses no direct risks to the baby.
However, because of being connected to the
machine, the mother cannot walk around. This
inactivity may prolong labor and reduce oxygen
levels in the mother’s blood, both of which can be
detrimental to the unborn baby. Another problem is
that electronic fetal monitoring seems to be associated with an increase in caesarian deliveries.
There is a concern that EFM can give false alarms
of distress in the baby, and that this can lead to
unneeded caesarians. With internal monitoring,
there is a higher risk for infection. For these and
other reasons, the United States Preventive Services
Task Force states that there is some evidence that
using electronic fetal monitoring on low-risk women
in labor might not be indicated. Many physicians,
however, continue to use EFM routinely, and believe
it to be of value in both low-risk and high-risk labors.
Normal results
An unborn baby’s heart rate normally ranges
from 120–160 beats per minute (bpm). A baby who is
receiving enough oxygen through the placenta will
move around. The monitor strip will show the baby’s
heart rate rising briefly as he/she moves (just as an
adult’s heart rate rises when he/she moves).
The baby’s monitor strip is considered to be reactive
when the baby’s heart rate rises atleast 20 bpm above the
baseline heart rate for at least 20 seconds. This must
occur at least twice in a 20-minute period. A reactive
heart rate tracing (also known as a reactive non-stress
test) is considered a sign of the baby’s well being.
Abnormal results
If the baby’s heart rate drops very low or rises very
high, this signals a serious problem. In either of these
cases it is obvious that the baby is in distress and must
be delivered soon. However, many babies who are
having problems do not give such clear signs.
During a contraction, the flow of oxygen (from
the mother) through the placenta (to the baby) is
temporarily stopped. It is as if the baby has to hold
its breath during each contraction. Both the placenta
and the baby are designed to withstand this condition.
Between contractions, the baby should be receiving
more than enough oxygen to do well during the
contraction.
The first sign that a baby is not getting enough
oxygen between contractions is often a drop in the
baby’s heart rate after the contraction (late deceleration). The baby’s heart rate recovers to a normal level
between contractions, only to drop again after the
next contraction. This is also a more subtle sign of
distress.
These babies will do fine if they are delivered in a
short period of time. Sometimes, these signs develop
long before delivery is expected. In that case, a
C-section may be necessary.