Definition
Emergency contraception or emergency birth control uses either emergency contraceptive pills (ECPs)
or a Copper-T intrauterine device (IUD) to help prevent pregnancy following unprotected vaginal
intercourse.
Purpose
Emergency contraception may be used to prevent
pregnancy after vaginal intercourse when:
 A birth control method was not used. Young people,
in particular, may not be prepared for their first
experience of sexual intercourse.
 A condom broke or slipped and ejaculation occurred
within the woman’s vagina.
 The male failed to withdraw from the vagina before
ejaculation.
 A woman failed to take her birth control pills.
 A diaphragm, cap, or shield slipped out of place,
followed by ejaculation within the vagina.
 A woman’s ‘‘safe days’’ were miscalculated.
 A woman was raped or otherwise forced to have
unprotected intercourse.
Women who missed taking their oral contraceptives may consider emergency contraception if:
 A new packet of pills was started at least two days
late.
 Two to four of the first seven active (hormone-containing) pills (days 1–7) were missed.
 Five or more active pills were missed consecutively.
On average eight out of every 100 fertile women
will become pregnant after having one episode of
unprotected vaginal intercourse during the second or
third week of their menstrual cycle. Following treatment with combined ECPs, only two of those 100
women will become pregnant—a 75% reduction.
Following treatment with progestin-only ECPs, only
one woman out of the 100 will become pregnant—an
89% reduction. Following emergency insertion of an
IUD there is a 99.9% reduction in the risk of
pregnancy.
Precautions
Emergency contraception does not work after the
onset of pregnancy; nor should it be used as a regular
method of birth control. ECPs do not prevent pregnancy from intercourse that occurs following the
treatment; another birth control method must be
used to prevent pregnancy. Although ECPs will not
affect an existing pregnancy and will not harm the
fetus, emergency contraception should not be used if
a woman is already pregnant.
Frequent use of ECPs can result in irregular or
unpredictable menstrual periods. Additional doses of
ECPs usually do not reduce the risk of pregnancy and
they increase the risk of side effects including nausea
and vomiting.
Almost all women can use emergency contraception safely, even those who cannot use oral contraceptives as a regular method of birth control because
of heart disease, blood clots, stroke, or other cardiovascular problems. The anti-convulsive medication
Dilantin may reduce the effectiveness of ECPs. Some
physicians recommend doubling the first of the two
ECP doses if taken with Dilantin.
Progestin-only ECPs (POPs) are not recommended for women who:
 may be pregnant already
 have a hypersensitivity to any component of the
medication
 have abnormal, undiagnosed genital bleeding.
Copper-T IUDs should not be used for emergency
contraception if a woman:
 is pregnant
 has a history of pelvic inflammatory disease (PID)
that has impaired her fertility
 has one of numerous other conditions affecting her
reproductive system
 has—or is currently at risk for contracting—a sexually transmitted disease (STD) such as HIV/AIDS,
chlamydia, or gonorrhea, since IUD insertion can
introduce infectious agents into the sterile uterine
cavity.
Those at risk for contracting an STD include
women who:
 have been raped
 have had unprotected sex with a new partner
 are in a non-monogamous relationship
 use intravenous drugs
 have partners who use intravenous drugs
Description
Although emergency contraception—sometimes
called post-coital or morning-after contraception—
has been available for over a quarter of a century,
almost one-half of the 6.3 million pregnancies in the
United States each year are unintended. Among teen
pregnancies 80% are unintentional. About one-half of
unintended pregnancies are caused by contraceptive
failure, either a failure of the method or a mistake by
the user. The remainder of unintended pregnancies
occurs because birth control was not employed.
Emergency contraception could help prevent some of
the 1.4 million abortions that take place in the United
States every year.
Emergency contraception prevents pregnancy by
one of the following methods:
 delaying or inhibiting ovulation—the release of eggs
from the ovary
 altering the transport of the sperm or egg, thereby
preventing fertilization of the egg by a sperm
 altering the endometrium or uterine lining, thereby
preventing implantation—the attachment of the fertilized egg to the wall of the uterus
The mechanism by which ECPs prevent pregnancy
depends on the stage of the woman’s menstrual cycle.
In most cases ECPs delay or inhibit ovulation and have
no effect on implantation. IUDs used as emergency
contraception appear to interfere with implantation
of the fertilized egg; although they also may prevent
fertilization, as they are thought to do when they are
used as a regular method of birth control.
Emergency contraceptive pills (ECPs)
ECPs contain synthetic hormones that mimic the
hormones produced by a woman’s body. Many common brands of birth control pills can be used for emergency contraception even though they are not labeled
for that use. Any of the first 21 pills in a regular 28-pill
package of oral contraceptives can be used for emergency contraception. The last seven pills in 28-pill packs
do not contain hormones. The number of pills that
constitute an emergency contraceptive dose depends
on the brand of pill. The same brand should be used
for both doses of ECPs. Many ECPs are available outside of the United States, where they are packaged,
labeled, and sold for emergency contraceptive purposes.
COMBINED ECPS. Combined ECPs available in the
United States contain 100 micrograms of the synthetic
estrogen, ethinyl estradiol, and 0.5–0.6 mg of the synthetic progestin levonorgestrel per dose. Combined
ECPs are taken according to the Yuzpe Regimen,
named after A. Albert Yuzpe, the Canadian researcher
who first demonstrated their safety and effectiveness in
1974. With the Yuzpe Regimen, the first dose of combined ECPs is taken as soon as possible after unprotected intercourse and the second dose is taken 12
hours later. However the timing of the second dose
can vary by a few hours without diminishing its effectiveness. The Preven Emergency Contraceptive Kit—
the first product to be specifically labeled and marketed
for emergency contraception—is no longer available.
Combined ECPs available in the United States
include:
 Alesse, manufactured by Wyeth-Ayerst; five pink
pills per dose
 Aviane, manufactured by Duramed; five orange pills
per dose
 Cryselle, manufactured by Barr; four white pills per
dose
 Enpresse from Barr; four orange pills per dose
 Lessina from Barr; five pink pills per dose
 Levlen from Berlex; four light orange pills per dose
 Levlite from Berlex; five pink pills per dose
 Levora from Watson; four white pills per dose
 Lo/Ovral from Wyeth-Ayerst; four white pills per
dose
 Low-Ogestrel from Watson; four white pills per dose
 Lutera from Watson; five white pills per dose
 Nordette from Wyeth-Ayerst; four light orange pills
per dose
 Ogestrel from Watson; two white pills per dose
 Ovral from Wyeth-Ayerst; two white pills per dose
 Portia from Barr; four pink pills per dose
 Seasonale from Barr; four pink pills per dose
 Tri-Levlen from Berlex; four yellow pills per dose
 Triphasil from Wyeth-Ayerst; four yellow pills per
dose
 Trivora from Watson; four pink pills per dose
PROGESTIN-ONLY ECPS. Progestin-only ECPs
(POPs) are prescribed frequently, particularly for
women who cannot take estrogen or who are breastfeeding. POPs contain 0.75 mg of levonorgestrel per
dose. They are equally effective regardless of whether
the two doses are taken simultaneously or 12–24 hours
apart. POPs are most effective if taken within 72 hours
of unprotected intercourse; however they reduce the
risk of pregnancy if taken within 120 hours.
Progestin-only pills include:
 Plan B from Barr is the only drug available in the
United States that is specifically designed and designated as an ECP—one white pill per dose.
 Ovrette from Wyeth-Ayerth requires swallowing 20
yellow pills for each dose.
The Copper-T IUD
The Copper-T 380A IUD (ParaGard) is a
T-shaped device that provides emergency contraception if inserted into the uterus by a healthcare provider
within seven days after unprotected intercourse. It can
be removed by the healthcare provider after the
woman’s next menstrual period begins or it can remain
in place for up to 10–12 years as an effective method of
birth control.
Availability
In most of the United States, emergency contraception requires a special prescription or a prescription for a monthly supply of an appropriate
oral contraceptive. Most physicians do not routinely discuss the use of emergency contraception
with their patients and some pharmacies refuse to
carry ECPs.
Emergency contraception is available from:
 public and college health clinics
 women’s health centers
 Planned Parenthood clinics
 private doctors
 hospital emergency rooms, except those affiliated
with a religion that opposes the use of birth control
 pharmacists directly, in a small number of states.
Some healthcare providers may prescribe ECPs
over the telephone. Sexual assault victims may be
offered ECPs in the hospital emergency room.
In many countries ECPs are available without a
prescription. However in the United States emergency
contraception remains controversial. In September of
2004, the U. S. Department of Justice released guidelines for the treatment of sexual assault victims without mentioning the option of emergency
contraception. As of early 2005, the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) had delayed approval of
over-the-counter (OTC) status for Plan B. However
many professional healthcare organizations and advocacy groups for women’s reproductive rights were
working to make ECPs available without a prescription in the United States.
Costs
The cost of emergency contraception varies
greatly according to region and location and any additional required services. Family-planning clinics and
public healthcare centers may provide lower-cost
emergency contraception or charge according to an
income-based sliding scale.
As of 2005, estimated costs for emergency contraception were:
 $8–$35 for Plan B
 $20–$50 for combined ECPs
 $50–$70 for other progestin-only ECPs
 $35–$150 for a visit to a healthcare provider
 $10–$20 for a pregnancy test
 about $400 for an exam, IUD, and insertion; however the IUD can remain in place for up to 12 years.
Preparation
For emergency contraception to be effective, it
must be used as soon as possible following unprotected intercourse. Some healthcare providers and
women’s health centers prescribe or supply packets
of ECPs—called EC-to-Go—so that they are available immediately if required. Supplies of ECPs are
particularly important for women who are at high
risk for having unprotected intercourse. EC-to-Go
also avoids the cost of an extra visit to a healthcare
provider.
Studies have found that neither the use of ECPs,
nor having a supply of ECPs on hand, reduce the
likelihood that women, including teenagers, will use
conventional contraceptive methods. In fact it has
been shown that the use of ECPs often increases the
likelihood that a regular birth control method will be
employed.
If an office visit is required, a healthcare provider
may take a medical history, perform a pregnancy test
on a urine sample, and—provided that pregnancy has
not occurred—discuss the appropriate type of emergency contraception.
Aftercare
For about 10–15% of women who take ECPs, the
timing, duration, and/or amount of bleeding for their
next menstrual period may be different than usual.
About 50% of women have their first post-ECP menstrual period one to three days earlier or later than
expected. Most often it is earlier than expected.
Bleeding may be normal or heavier, lighter, or more
spotty than usual.
Following IUD insertion, a woman may need to
be escorted or driven home and she may require rest.
Risks
Emergency contraception is considered to be
both safe and effective for teenagers as well as
adult women. However emergency contraception
may not prevent an ectopic pregnancy—a pregnancy outside of the uterus, in the fallopian tubes
or abdomen. Ectopic pregnancies are medical emergencies and can be fatal.
Side effects of ECPs
About 50% of women feel sick to their stomachs
for approximately 24 hours after taking combined
ECPs. Nausea occurs in 30–50% of women and
15–25% of women experience vomiting. Only 23% of
women who take progestin-only ECPs experience nausea and only 6% have vomiting.
If vomiting occurs within one hour of taking
ECPs, the dose may have to be repeated. OTC medications such as Dramamine II, Bonine, or their generic
equivalents, taken one hour before the ECPs, reduce
the risk of nausea and vomiting, although they may
cause drowsiness. Two 25-mg tablets of Meclizine,
taken one hour before the ECPs, reduce the risk of
nausea by 27% and the risk of vomiting by 64%;
however there is about a 30% risk of drowsiness. If
vomiting occurs after the first dose of an ECP, antinausea medication should be taken one hour before
the second dose. The second dose also may be taken as
a vaginal suppository by placing the pills as far as
possible into the vagina for absorption through the
vaginal tissue.
Other side effects of ECPs can include:
 breast tenderness
 abdominal pain
 irregular bleeding
 dizziness
 headaches
 fatigue.
Side effects usually last only one to two days and
are far less frequent with progestin-only ECPs as compared with combined ECPs.
Side effects of IUD insertion
Side effects of IUD insertion may include:
 abdominal discomfort
 vaginal bleeding or spotting
 infection.
However the risk of pelvic infection is very small
among women who are not at risk for STDs.
Other possible side effects of IUD insertion
include:
 heavy menstrual flow
 cramping
 infertility
 uterine puncture.
Normal results
The effectiveness of emergency contraception
depends both on the stage of the woman’s menstrual
cycle and on how soon the emergency contraception is
used following unprotected vaginal intercourse. The
closer a woman is to ovulation—her fertile period
during which eggs are released from the ovary—the
less effective emergency contraception will be.
ECPs are less effective than the most popular birth
control methods:
 If taken within 72 hours of unprotected intercourse,
combined ECPs are about 75% effective for preventing pregnancy.
 Progestin-only ECPs are 95% effective if taken
within 24 hours of unprotected intercourse and
about 89% effective if taken within 72 hours.
 A Copper-T IUD is 99.9% effective if inserted within
seven days of unprotected intercourse.
If a normal menstrual period does not begin
within three weeks after taking ECPs, or if signs of
pregnancy develop, a healthcare provider should be
consulted immediately.
Signs of pregnancy include:
 a missed menstrual period
 nausea
 unexplained fatigue
 enlarged or sore breasts
 headaches
 frequent urination
The majority of women express satisfaction with
emergency contraception. One study of 235 women
who had used ECPs found that 91% were satisfied
with the method and 97% would recommend it to
others.