Definition
Encephalitis is an inflammation of the brain,
usually caused by a direct viral infection or a hypersensitivity reaction to a virus or foreign protein. Brain
inflammation caused by a bacterial infection is sometimes called cerebritis. When both the brain and spinal
cord are involved, the disorder is called encephalomyelitis. An inflammation of the brain’s covering, or
meninges, is called meningitis.
Description
Encephalitis is an inflammation of the brain. The
inflammation is a reaction of the body’s immune system to infection or invasion. During the inflammation,
the brain’s tissues become swollen. The combination
of the infection and the immune reaction to it can
cause headache and a fever, as well as more severe
symptoms in some cases.
Approximately 2,000 cases of encephalitis are
reported to the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta,
GA each year. The viruses causing primary encephalitis
can be epidemic or sporadic. The polio virus is an epidemic cause. Arthropod-borne viral encephalitis is
responsible for most epidemic viral encephalitis. The
viruses live in animal hosts and mosquitos that transmit
the disease. The most common form of non-epidemic or
sporadic encephalitis is caused by the herpes simplex
virus, type 1 (HSV-1) and has a high rate of death.
Mumps is another example of a sporadic cause.
Causes and symptoms
Causes
There are more than a dozen viruses that can cause
encephalitis, spread by either human-to human contact
or by animal bites. Encephalitis may occur with several
common viral infections of childhood. Viruses and
viral diseases that may cause encephalitis include:
 chickenpox
 measles
 mumps
 Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
 cytomegalovirus infection
 HIV
 herpes simplex
 herpes zoster (shingles)
 herpes B
 polio
 rabies
 mosquito-borne viruses (arboviruses)
Primary encephalitis is caused by direct infection
by the virus, while secondary encephalitis is due to a
post-infectious immune reaction to viral infection elsewhere in the body. Secondary encephalitis may occur
with measles, chickenpox, mumps, rubella, and EBV.
In secondary encephalitis, symptoms usually begin
five to 10 days after the onset of the disease itself and
are related to the breakdown of the myelin sheath that
covers nerve fibers.
In rare cases, encephalitis may follow vaccination
against some of the viral diseases listed above.
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, a very rare brain disorder
caused by an infectious particle called a prion, may
also cause encephalitis.
Mosquitoes spread viruses responsible for equine
encephalitis (eastern and western types), St. Louis encephalitis, California encephalitis, and Japanese encephalitis. Lyme disease, spread by ticks, can cause
encephalitis, as can Colorado tick fever. Rabies is most
often spread by animal bites from dogs, cats, mice, raccoons, squirrels, and bats and may cause encephalitis.
Equine encephalitis is carried by mosquitoes that
do not normally bite humans but do bite horses and
birds. It is occasionally picked up from these animals
by mosquitoes that do bite humans. Japanese encephalitis and St. Louis encephalitis are also carried by
mosquitoes. The risk of contracting a mosquitoborne virus is greatest in mid- to late summer, when
mosquitoes are most active, in those rural areas where
these viruses are known to exist. Eastern equine encephalitis occurs in eastern and southeastern United
States; western equine and California encephalitis
occur throughout the West; and St. Louis encephalitis
occurs throughout the country. Japanese encephalitis
does not occur in the United States, but is found
throughout much of Asia. The viruses responsible
for these diseases are classified as arbovirus and these
diseases are collectively called arbovirus encephalitis.
Herpes simplex encephalitis, the most common
form of sporadic encephalitis in western countries, is
a disease with significantly high mortality. It occurs in
children and adults and both sides of the brain are
affected. It is theorized that brain infection is caused
by the virus moving from a peripheral location to the
brain via two nerves, the olfactory and the trigeminal
(largest nerves in the skull).Herpes simplex encephalitis is responsible for
10% of all encephalitis cases and is the main cause of
sporadic, fatal encephalitis. In untreated patients, the
rate of death is 70% while the mortality is 15–20% in
patients who have been treated with acyclovir. The
symptoms of herpes simplex encephalitis are fever,
rapidly disintegrating mental state, headache, and
behavioral changes.
Symptoms
The symptoms of encephalitis range from very
mild to very severe and may include:
 headache
 fever
 lethargy (sleepiness, decreased alertness, and fatigue)
 malaise
 nausea and vomiting
 visual disturbances
 tremor
 decreased consciousness (drowsiness, confusion,
delirium, and unconsciousness)
 stiff neck
 seizures
Symptoms may progress rapidly, changing from
mild to severe within several days or even several
hours.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of encephalitis includes careful questioning to determine possible exposure to viral
sources. Tests that can help confirm the diagnosis
and rule out other disorders include:
 Blood tests. These are to detect antibodies to viral
antigens, and foreign proteins.
 Cerebrospinal fluid analysis (spinal tap). This detects
viral antigens, and provides culture specimens for the
virus or bacteria that may be present in the cerebrospinal fluid.
 Electroencephalogram (EEG).
 CT and MRI scans.
A brain biopsy (surgical gathering of a small tissue
sample) may be recommended in some cases where
treatment to date has been ineffective and the cause
of the encephalitis is unclear. Definite diagnosis by
biopsy may allow specific treatment that would otherwise be too risky.
Treatment
Choice of treatment for encephalitis will depend
on the cause. Bacterial encephalitis is treated with
antibiotics. Viral encephalitis is usually treated with
antiviral drugs including acyclovir, ganciclovir, foscarnet, ribovarin, and AZT. Viruses that respond to
acyclovir include herpes simplex, the most common
cause of sporadic (non-epidemic) encephalitis in the
United States.
The symptoms of encephalitis may be treated with
a number of different drugs. Corticosteroids, including
prednisone and dexamethasone, are sometimes prescribed to reduce inflammation and brain swelling.
Anticonvulsant drugs, including dilantin and phenytoin, are used to control seizures. Fever may be
reduced with acetaminophen or other fever-reducing
drugs.
A person with encephalitis must be monitored
carefully, since symptoms may change rapidly. Blood
tests may be required regularly to track levels of fluids
and salts in the blood.
Prognosis
Encephalitis symptoms may last several weeks.
Most cases of encephalitis are mild, and recovery is
usually quick. Mild encephalitis usually leaves no residual neurological problems. Overall, approximately
10% of those with encephalitis die from their infections or complications such as secondary infection.
Some forms of encephalitis have more severe courses,
including herpes encephalitis, in which mortality is
15–20% with treatment, and 70–80% without.
Antiviral treatment is ineffective for eastern equine
encephalitis, and mortality is approximately 30%.
Permanent neurological consequences may follow
recovery in some cases. Consequences may include
personality changes, memory loss, language difficulties, seizures, and partial paralysis.
Prevention
Because encephalitis is due to infection, it may be
prevented by avoiding the infection. Minimizing contact with others who have any of the viral illness listed
above may reduce the chances of becoming infected.
Most infections are spread by hand-to-hand or handto-mouth contact; frequent hand washing may reduce
the likelihood of infection if contact cannot be avoided.
Mosquito-borne viruses may be avoided by preventing mosquito bites. Mosquitoes are most active at
dawn and dusk, and are most common in moist areas
with standing water. Minimizing exposed skin and use
of mosquito repellents on other areas can reduce the
chances of being bitten.
Vaccines are available against some viruses,
including polio, herpes B, Japanese encephalitis, and
equine encephalitis. Rabies vaccine is available for
animals; it is also given to people after exposure.
Japanese encephalitis vaccine is recommended for
those traveling to Asia and staying in affected rural
areas during transmission season.