Definition
Encopresis is repeatedly having bowel movements
in places other than the toilet after the age when bowel
control can normally be expected.
Description
Most children have established bowel control by
the time they are four years old. After that age, when
they repeatedly have bowel movements in inappropriate places, they may have encopresis. In the United
States, encopresis affects 1–2% of children under age 10. About 80% of these are boys.
Encopresis can be either involuntary or voluntary.
Involuntary encopresis is related to constipation, passing hard painful feces, and difficult bowel movements. Often children with involuntary encopresis
stain their underpants with liquid feces. They are
usually unaware that this has happened. Voluntary
encopresis is much less common and is associated
with behavioral or psychological problems. Both
types of encopresis occur most often when the child
is awake, rather than at night.
Causes and symptoms
Although a few children experience encopresis
because of malformations of the lower bowel and
anus or irritable bowel disease, most have no physical problems to explain this disorder. Constipation is
present in about 80% of children who experience
involuntary encopresis. As feces moves through the
large intestine, water is removed. The longer the
feces stays in the large intestine, the more water is
removed, and the harder the feces becomes. The
result can be hard or painful bowel movements. In
response, children may start to hold back when they
feel the urge to eliminate in order to avoid pain. This
starts a cycle of constipation that results in retentive
encopresis.
Once elimination is avoided, the bowel becomes
full of hard feces. This stretches the large intestine.
Eventually the intestine becomes so stretched that
liquid feces backed up behind the blockage is able to
leak around the hard feces. Children with this type of
encopresis do not feel the urge to have a bowel movement and are often surprised when their pants are
stained with foul smelling liquid feces. This leakage
of feces is called overflow incontinence. Parents sometimes mistake this soiling for diarrhea, because the
feces expelled is liquid. Every so often, children with
involuntary encopresis may pass large stools, sometimes with volumes big enough to clog the toilet, but
the relief this brings is temporary.
Although about 95% of encopresis is involuntary,
some children intentionally withhold bowel movements. The American Psychiatric Association (APA)
recognizes voluntary encopresis without constipation
as a psychological disorder. This disorder is said to
occur when a child who has control over his bowel
movements chooses to have them in an inappropriate
place. The feces is a normal consistency, not hard.
Sometimes it is smeared in an obvious place, but it
may also be hidden from adults.
Voluntary encopresis may result from a power
struggle between caregivers and the child during toilet
training, or the child may have developed an unusual
fear of the toilet. It is also associated with oppositional
defiant disorder(ODD), conduct disorder, sexual abuse,
and high levels of psychological stress. For example,
children who were separated from their parents during
World War II were reported to have a high rate of
encopresis. However, parents and caregivers should be
aware that very few children soil intentionally and
most do not have a behavioral or psychological problem and should not be punished for their soiling
accidents.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based primarily on the child’s history
of inappropriate bowel movements. Physical examinations are almost always normal, except for a mass of
hard feces blocking the lower intestine. Other physical
causes of soiling, such as illness, reaction to medication, food allergies, and physical disabilities, may also
be ruled out through history and a physical examination. In addition, to be diagnosed with encopresis the
child must be old enough to establish regular bowel
control—usually chronologically and developmentally at least four years of age.
Treatment
The goal of treatment is to establish regular, soft,
pain free bowel movements in the toilet. First the
physician tries to determine the cause of encopresis,
whether physical or psychological. Regardless of the
cause, the bowel must be emptied of hard, impacted
feces This can be done using an enema, laxatives,
and/or stool softeners such as mineral oil. Enemas
and laxatives should be used only at a doctor’s
recommendation.
Next, the child is given stool softeners to keep feces
soft and to give the stretched intestine time to shrink
back to its normal size. This shrinking process may
take several months, during which time stool softeners
may need to be used regularly. Children also need two
or three regularly scheduled toilet sits daily in an effort
to establish consistent bowel habits. These toilet sits are
often more effective if done after meals. Maintaining
soft, easy-to-pass stools is also important if the child is
afraid of the toilet because of past painful bowel movements. A child psychologist or psychiatrist can suggest
treatment for the rare child with serious behavioral
problems such as smearing or hiding feces.
Alternative treatment
Many herbal stool softeners and laxatives are
available as both tablets and liquids. Psyllium, the
seed of several plants of the genus Plantago is one of
the most effective. Other natural remedies for constipation include castor seed oil (Ricinus communis),
senna (Cassia senna or Senna alexandrina), and dong
quai Angelica polymorpha or Angelica sinensis.
Prognosis
For almost all children, once constipation is controlled, the problem of soiling disappears. This make
take several months, and relapses may occur, but with
effective prevention strategies, encopresis can be eliminated. Children who are in a power struggle over
toileting usually outgrow their desire to have bowel
movements in inappropriate places. The prognosis for
children with serious behavioral and psychological
problems that result in smearing or hiding feces
depends largely on resolving the underlying problems.
Prevention
The best way to prevent encopresis is to prevent
constipation. Methods of preventing constipation
include:
increasing the amount of liquids, especially water,
the child drinks
 adding high fiber foods to the diet (e.g. dried beans,
fresh fruits and vegetables, whole wheat bread and
pasta, popcorn)
 establishing regular bowel habits
 limiting the child’s intake of dairy products (e.g.
milk, cheese, yogurt, ice cream) that promote
constipation.
 treating constipation promptly with stool softeners,
so that it does not become worse.