Definition
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) is a technique in which a hollow tube
called an endoscope is passed through the mouth and
stomach to the duodenum (the first part of the small
intestine). This procedure was developed to examine
abnormalities of the bile ducts, pancreas, and gallbladder. It was developed during the late 1960s and is used
today to diagnose and treat blockages of the bile and
pancreatic ducts.The term has three parts to its definition:
 endoscopic refers to the use of an endoscope
 retrograde refers to the injection of dye up into the
bile ducts in a direction opposing, or against, the
normal flow of bile down the ducts
 cholangiopancreatography means visualization of
the bile ducts (cholangio) and pancreas (pancreato)
Purpose
Until the 1970s, methods to visualize the bile ducts
produced images that were of relatively poor quality
and often misleading; in addition, the pancreatic duct
could not be examined at all. Patients with symptoms
related to the bile ducts or pancreatic ducts frequently
needed surgery to diagnose and treat their conditions.
Using ERCP, physicians can obtain high-quality x
rays of these structures and identify areas of narrowing
(strictures), cancers, and gallstones. This procedure can
help determine whether bile or pancreatic ducts are
blocked; it also identifies where they are blocked
along with the cause of the blockage. ERCP may then
be used to relieve the blockage. For patients requiring
surgery or additional procedures for treatment, ERCP
outlines the anatomical changes for the surgeon.
Precautions
The most important precaution is that the examination should be performed by an experienced physician. The procedure is much more technically difficult
than many other gastrointestinal endoscopic studies.
Patients should seek physicians with experience performing ERCP. Patients should inform the physician
about any allergies (including allergies to contrast
dyes, iodine, or shellfish), medication use, and medical
problems. Occasionally, patients may need to be
admitted to the hospital after the procedure.
Description
After sedation, a specially adapted endoscope is
passed through the mouth, through the stomach, then
into the duodenum. The opening to ducts that empty
from the liver and pancreas is identified, and a plastic
tube or catheter is placed into the orifice (opening).
Contrast dye is then injected into the ducts, and with
the assistance of a radiologist, pictures are taken.
Preparation
The upper intestinal tract must be empty for the
procedure, so patients should not eat or drink for at
least six to 12 hours before the exam. Patients should
ask the physician about taking their medications
before the procedure.
Aftercare
Someone should be available to take the person
home after the procedure and stay with them for a
while; patients will not be able to drive themselves
because they undergo sedation during this test. Pain
or any other unusual symptoms should be reported to
the physician.
Risks
ERCP-related complications can be broken down
into those related to medications used during the procedure, the diagnostic part of the procedure, and those
related to endoscopic therapy. The overall complication rate is 5–10%; most of those occur when diagnostic ERCP is combined with a therapeutic procedure.
During the exam, the endoscopist can cut or stretch
structures (such as the muscle leading to the bile duct)
to treat the cause of the patient’s symptoms. Although
the use of sedatives carries a risk of decreasing cardiac
and respiratory function, it is very difficult to perform
these procedures without these drugs.
The major complications related to diagnostic
ERCP are pancreatitis (inflammation of the pancreas)
and cholangitis (inflammation of the bile ducts).
Bacteremia (the passage of bacteria into the blood
stream) and perforation (hole in the intestinal tract)
are additional risks.Normal results
Because certain standards have been set for the
normal diameter or width of the pancreatic duct and
bile ducts, measurements using x rays are taken to
determine if the ducts are too large (dilated) or too
narrow (strictured). The ducts and gallbladder should
be free of stones or tumors.
Abnormal results
When areas in the pancreatic or bile ducts (including those in the liver) are too wide or too narrow
compared with the standard, the test is considered
abnormal. Once these findings are demonstrated
using ERCP, symptoms are usually present; they generally do not change without treatment. Stones, identified as opaque or solid structures within the ducts,
are also considered abnormal. Masses or tumors may
also be seen, but sometimes the diagnosis is made not
by direct visualization of the tumor, but by indirect
signs, such as a single narrowing of one of the ducts.
Overall, ERCP has an excellent record in diagnosing
these abnormalities.