Definition
Endometrial biopsy is a procedure in which a
sample of the endometrium (tissue lining the inside
of the uterus) is removed for microscopic examination.
Purpose
The test is most often performed to find out the
cause of abnormal uterine bleeding. Abnormal bleeding includes bleeding between menstrual periods,
excessive bleeding during a menstrual period, or bleeding after menopause. Since abnormal uterine bleeding
can indicate cancer, an endometrial biopsy is done to
rule out endometrial cancer or hyperplasia (a potentially precancerous condition).
Endometrial biopsies are also done as a screening
test for endometrial cancer in postmenopausal women
on hormone replacement therapy. Hormone replacement therapy usually requires a woman to take estrogen and progesterone. An endometrial biopsy is
particularly useful in cases where postmenopausal
women take estrogen, but cannot take progesterone.
Estrogen in the system without the balancing effect of
progesterone has been linked to an increased risk of
endometrial cancer.
An endometrial biopsy can also be used as part of
an infertility exam to rule out problems with the development of the endometrium. This condition is called
luteal phase defect and can cause the endometrium to
not support a pregnancy. An endometrial biopsy can
also be used to evaluate the problem of repeated early
miscarriages.
Precautions
If the endometrial biopsy is being done to investigate why a woman is unable to get pregnant, the test
must be performed at a specific time during the menstrual cycle. Since the test evaluates whether the endometrium is developed adequately to support
implantation and growth of a fertilized egg, it is critical to perform the test approximately three days
before the expected menstrual period.
Description
The test is performed by a doctor who specializes
in women’s reproductive health (an obstetrician/gynecologist). The test is performed either in the doctor’s
office or in a local hospital. The patient may be asked
to take pain medication (like Motrin or Aleve) an hour
or so before the procedure. A local anesthetic may be
injected into the cervix in order to decrease pain and
discomfort during the procedure.
The woman will be asked to lie on her back with
knees apart and feet in stirrups. The doctor will first
conduct a thorough exam of the pelvic region, including the vulva (the external genitals), vagina, and
uterus. A speculum (an instrument that is used to
hold the walls of the vagina open) will be inserted
into the vagina. A small, hollow plastic tube is then
passed into the uterine cavity. A small piece of the
uterine lining is sucked out with a plunger that is
attached to the tube. Once the sample is obtained,
the instruments are removed. The sample is sent to
the laboratory for microscopic examination.
The patient may experience some pain when the
cervix is grasped. The patient may also feel some
cramping, pressure, and discomfort when the instruments are inserted into the uterus and the tissue sample is collected.
Preparation
For the small number of endometrial biopsies that
are done as part of infertility testing, a pregnancy test
is also often performed before the procedure. Since the
biopsy is performed late in the menstrual cycle, it is
possible that the woman may be pregnant.
Aftercare
The biopsy may cause a small amount of bleeding
(spotting). The woman can resume normal activities
right away. If cramping becomes severe, heavy bleeding occurs, or the woman develops a high temperature,
the doctor should be notified immediately.
If the test is being done to determine the cause of
infertility, the onset of the menstrual period following
the biopsy should be reported to the doctor. This will
allow the doctor to correctly predict if the endometrium has been developing at the expected rate.
Risks
The risks of an endometrial biopsy are very small.
There is a possibility that prolonged bleeding may
occur after the procedure. There is also a slight chance
of an infection. Very rarely, there are instances when
the uterus is pierced (perforated) or the cervix is torn
because of the biopsy.
Normal results
Most biopsies are done to rule out endometrial
cancer or endometrial hyperplasia. A normal result
shows no cancerous or precancerous cells. Normal
results also show that the uterine lining is changing
at the proper rate. If it is, then the results of the biopsy
are said to be ‘‘in-phase’’ because the tissue looks
appropriate and has developed normally for the late
phase of the menstrual cycle.
Abnormal results
If the endometrium is not developing at the appropriate rate, the results are said to be ‘‘out-of-phase’’ or
abnormal. The endometrium has not developed
appropriately and cannot support a pregnancy. This
condition is called luteal phase defect and may need to
be treated with progesterone.
Abnormal appearance of the cells forming the
uterine tissue could also indicate uterine cancer, or
the presence of fibroids or polyps in the uterus.