Definition
Endometrial cancer develops when the cells that
make up the inner lining of the uterus (the endometrium) become abnormal and grow uncontrollably.
Description
Endometrial cancer (also called uterine cancer) is
the fourth most common type of cancer among
women and the most common gynecologic cancer.
Approximately 34,000 women are diagnosed with
endometrial cancer each year. In 1998, approximately
6,300 women died from this cancer. Although endometrial cancer generally occurs in women who have
gone through menopause and are 45 years of age or
older, 30% of the women with endometrial cancer are
younger than 40 years of age. The average age at
diagnosis is 60 years old.
The uterus, or womb, is the hollow female organ
that supports the development of the unborn baby
during pregnancy. The uterus has a thick muscular
wall and an inner lining called the endometrium. The
endometrium is very sensitive to hormones and it
changes daily during the menstrual cycle. The endometrium is designed to provide an ideal environment
for the fertilized egg to implant and begin to grow. If
pregnancy does not occur, the endometrium is shed
causing the menstrual period.
More than 95% of uterine cancers arise in the
endometrium. The most common type of uterine cancer is adenocarcinoma. It arises from an abnormal
multiplication of endometrial cells (atypical adenomatous hyperplasia) and is made up of mature, specialized cells (well-differentiated). Less commonly,
endometrial cancer arises without a preceding hyperplasia and is made up of poorly differentiated cells.
The more common of these types are the papillary
serous and clear cell carcinomas. Poorly differentiated
endometrial cancers are often associated with a less
promising prognosis.
The highest incidence of endometrial cancer in the
United States is in Caucasians, Hawaiians, Japanese,
and African Americans. American Indians, Koreans,
and Vietnamese have the lowest incidence. African
American and Hawaiian women are more likely to
be diagnosed with advanced cancer and, therefore,
have a higher risk of dying from the disease.
Causes and symptoms
Although the exact cause of endometrial cancer is
unknown, it is clear that high levels of estrogen, when
not balanced by progesterone, can lead to abnormal
growth of the endometrium. Factors that increase a
woman’s risk of developing endometrial cancer are:
 Age. The risk is considerably higher in women who
are over the age of 50 and have gone through
menopause.
 Obesity. Being overweight is a very strong risk factor
for this cancer. Fatty tissue can change other normal
body chemicals into estrogen, which can promote
endometrial cancer.
 Estrogen replacement therapy. Women receiving
estrogen supplements after menopause have a 12
times higher risk of getting endometrial cancer if
progesterone is not taken simultaneously.
 Diabetes. Diabetics have twice the risk of getting this
cancer as nondiabetic women. It is not clear if this
risk is due to the fact that many diabetics are also
obese and hypertensive. One 1998 study found that
women who were obese and diabetic were three times
more likely to develop endometrial cancer than
women who were obese but nondiabetic. This study
also found that nonobese diabetics were not at risk of
developing endometrial cancer.
 Hypertension. High blood pressure (or hypertension)
is also considered a risk factor for uterine cancer.
 Irregular menstrual periods. During the menstrual
cycle, there is interaction between the hormones
estrogen and progesterone. Women who do not ovulate regularly are exposed to high estrogen levels for
longer periods of time. If a woman does not ovulate
regularly, this delicate balance is upset and may
increase her chances of getting uterine cancer.
 Early first menstruation or late menopause. Having
the first period at a young age (the mean age of
menses is 12.16 years in African American girls and
12.88 years in caucasian girls) or going through
menopause at a late age (over age 51) seem to put
women at a slightly higher risk for developing endometrial cancer.
Tamoxifen. This drug, which is used to treat or prevent breast cancer, increases a woman’s chance of
developing endometrial cancer. Tamoxifen users
tend to have more advanced endometrial cancer
with an associated poorer survival rate than those
who do not take the drug. In many cases, however,
the value of tamoxifen for treating breast cancer and
for preventing the cancer from spreading far outweighs the small risk of getting endometrial cancer.
 Family history. Some studies suggest that endometrial cancer runs in certain families. Women with
inherited mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2
genes are at a higher risk of developing breast, ovarian, and other gynecologic cancers. Those with the
hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer gene have
a higher risk of developing endometrial cancer.
 Breast, ovarian, or colon cancer. Women who have a
history of these other types of cancer are at an
increased risk of developing endometrial cancer.
 Low parity or nulliparity. Endometrial cancer is
more common in women who have born few (low
parity) or no (nulliparity) children. The high levels of
progesterone produced during pregnancy has a protective effect against endometrial cancer. The results
of one study suggest that nulliparity is associated
with a lower survival rate.
 Infertility. Risk is increased due to nulliparity or the
use of fertility drugs.
 Polycystic ovary syndrome. The increased level of
estrogen associated with this abnormality raises the
risk of cancers of the breast and endometrium.
The most common symptom of endometrial cancer is unusual vaginal spotting, bleeding, or discharge.
In women who are near menopause (perimenopausal),
symptoms of endometrial cancer could include bleeding between periods (intermenstrual bleeding), heavy
bleeding that lasts for more than seven days, or short
menstrual cycles (fewer than 21 days). For women
who have gone through menopause, any vaginal
bleeding or abnormal discharge is suspect. Pain in
the pelvic region and the presence of a lump (mass)
are symptoms that occur late in the disease.
Diagnosis
If endometrial cancer is suspected, a series of tests
will be conducted to confirm the diagnosis. The first
step will involve taking a complete personal and family
medical history. A physical examination, which will
include a thorough pelvic examination, will also be
done.
The doctor may order an endometrial biopsy. This
is generally performed in the doctor’s office and does
not require anesthesia. A thin, flexible tube is inserted
through the cervix and into the uterus. A small piece of
endometrial tissue is removed. The patient may experience some discomfort, which can be minimized by
taking an anti-inflammatory medication (like Advil
or Motrin) an hour before the procedure.
If an adequate amount of tissue was not obtained
by the endometrial biopsy, or if the biopsy tissue looks
abnormal but confirmation is needed, the doctor may
perform a dilatation and curettage (D & C). This procedure is done in the outpatient surgery department of
a hospital and takes about an hour. The patient may
be given general anesthesia. The doctor dilates the
cervix and uses a special instrument to scrape tissue
from inside the uterus.
The tissue that is obtained from the biopsy or the
D & C is sent to a laboratory for examination. If
cancer is found, then the type of cancer will be determined. The treatment and prognosis depends on the
type and stage of the cancer.
Trans-vaginal ultrasound may be used to measure
the thickness of the endometrium. For this painless
procedure, a wand-like ultrasound transducer is
inserted into the vagina to enable visualization and
measurement of the uterus, the thickness of the uterine
lining, and other pelvic organs.
Other possible diagnostic procedures include
sonohysterography and hysteroscopy. For sonohysteroscopy, a small tube is passed through the cervix
and into the uterus. A small amount of a salt water
(saline) solution is injected through the tube to open
the space within the uterus and allow ultrasound
visualization of the endometrium. For hysteroscopy,
a wand-like camera is passed through the cervix to
allow direct visualization of the endometrium. Both
of these procedures cause discomfort, which may be
reduced by taking an anti-inflammatory medication
prior to the procedure.
Treatment
Clinical staging
The International Federation of Gynecology and
Obstetrics (FIGO) has adopted a staging system for
endometrial cancer. The stage of cancer is determined
after surgery. Endometrial cancer is categorized into
four stages (I, II, III, and IV) that are subdivided
(A, B, and possibly C) based on the depth or spread
of cancerous tissue. Seventy percent of all uterine
cancers are stage I, 10–15% are stage II, and the
remainder are stages III and IV. The cancer is also
graded (G1, G2, and G3) based upon microscopic
analysis of the aggressiveness of the cancer cells.
The FIGO stages for endometrial cancer are:
 Stage I. Cancer is limited to the uterus.
 Stage II. Cancer involves the uterus and cervix.
 Stage III. Cancer has spread out of the uterus but is
restricted to the pelvic region.
 Stage IV. Cancer has spread to the bladder, bowel, or
other distant locations.
The mainstay of treatment for most stages of
endometrial cancer is surgery. Radiation therapy, hormonal therapy, and chemotherapy are additional treatments (called adjuvant therapy). The necessity of
adjuvant therapy is a controversial topic which should
be discussed with the patient’s treatment team.
Surgery
Most women with endometrial cancer, except
those with stage IV disease, are treated with a hysterectomy. A simple hysterectomy involves the removal
of the uterus. In a bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy
with total hysterectomy, the ovaries, fallopian tubes,
and uterus are removed. This may be necessary
because endometrial cancer often spreads to the ovaries first. The lymph nodes in the pelvic region may also
be biopsied or removed to check for metastasis.
Hysterectomy is traditionally performed through an
incision in the abdomen (laparotomy), however, endoscopic surgery (laparoscopy) with vaginal hysterectomy is also being used. Women with stage I disease
may require no further treatment. However, those
with higher grade disease will receive adjuvant
therapy.
Radiation therapy
The decision to use radiation therapy depends on
the stage of the disease. Radiation therapy may be
used before surgery (preoperatively) and/or after surgery (postoperatively). Radiation given from a
machine that is outside the body is called external
radiation therapy. Sometimes applicators containing
radioactive compounds are placed inside the vagina or
uterus. This is called internal radiation therapy or
brachytherapy and requires hospitalization.
Side effects are common with radiation therapy.
The skin in the treated area may become red and dry.
Fatigue, upset stomach, diarrhea, and nausea are also
common complaints. Radiation therapy in the pelvic
area may cause the vagina to become narrow (vaginalstenosis), making intercourse painful. Premature
menopause and some problems with urination may
also occur.
Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy is usually reserved for women with
stage IV or recurrent disease because this therapy is
not a very effective treatment for endometrial cancer.
The anticancer drugs are given by mouth or intravenously. Side effects include stomach upset, vomiting,
appetite loss, hair loss, mouth or vaginal sores, fatigue,
menstrual cycle changes, and premature menopause.
There is also an increased chance of infections.
Hormonal therapy
Hormonal therapy uses drugs like progesterone to
slow the growth of endometrial cells. These drugs are
usually available as pills. This therapy is usually
reserved for women with advanced or recurrent disease. Side effects include fatigue, fluid retention, and
appetite and weight changes.
Alternative treatment
Although alternative and complementary therapies
are used by many cancer patients, very few controlled
studies on the effectiveness of such therapies exist.
Mind-body techniques, such as prayer, biofeedback,
visualization, meditation, and yoga, have not shown
any effect in reducing cancer, but they can reduce stress
and lessen some of the side effects of cancer treatments.
Clinical studies of hydrazine sulfate found that it had
no effect on cancer and even worsened the health and
well-being of the study subjects. One clinical study of
the drug amygdalin (Laetrile) found that it had no
effect on cancer. Laetrile can be toxic and has caused
deaths. Shark cartilage, although highly touted as an
effective cancer treatment, is an improbable therapy
that has not been the subject of clinical study.
The American Cancer Society has found that the
‘‘metabolic diets’’ pose serious risk to the patient. The
effectiveness of the macrobiotic, Gerson, and Kelley
diets and the Manner metabolic therapy has not been
scientifically proven. The FDA was unable to substantiate the anticancer claims made about the popular Cancell treatment.
There is no evidence for the effectiveness of most
over-the-counter herbal cancer remedies. Some herbals have shown an anticancer effect. As shown in
clinical studies, Polysaccharide krestin, from the
mushroom Coriolus versicolor, has significant effectiveness against cancer. In a small study, the green
alga Chlorella pyrenoidosa has been shown to have
anticancer activity. In a few small studies, evening
primrose oil has shown some benefit in the treatment
of cancer.
Prognosis
Because it is possible to detect endometrial cancer
early, the chances of curing it are excellent. The five
year survival rates for endometrial cancer by stage are:
90%, stage I; 60%, stage II; 40%, stage III; and 5%,
stage IV. Endometrial cancer most often spreads to
the lungs, liver, bones, brain, vagina, and certain
lymph nodes.
Prevention
Women (especially postmenopausal women)
should report any abnormal vaginal bleeding or discharge to the doctor. Controlling obesity, blood pressure, and diabetes can help to reduce the risk of this
disease. Women on estrogen replacement therapy
have a substantially reduced risk of endometrial cancer if progestins are taken simultaneously. Long term
use of birth control pills has been shown to reduce the
risk of this cancer. Women who have irregular periods
may be prescribed birth control pills to help prevent
endometrial cancer. Women who are taking tamoxifen
and those who carry the hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer gene should be screened regularly,
receiving annual pelvic examinations.