Definition
An enema is the insertion of a solution into the
rectum and lower intestine.
Purpose
Enemas may be given for the following purposes:
 to remove feces when an individual is constipated or
impacted,
 to remove feces and cleanse the rectum in preparation for an examination,
 to remove feces prior to a surgical procedure to prevent contamination of the surgical area,
 to administer drugs or anesthetic agents.Precautions
The rectal tube used for infusion of the enema
solution should be smooth and flexible to decrease
the possibility of damage to the mucous membrane
that lines the rectum. Tap water is commonly used for
adults but should not be used for infants because of the
danger of electrolyte (substance that conducts electric
current within the body and is essential for sustaining
life) imbalance. The colon absorbs water, and repeated
tap water enemas can cause cardiovascular overload
and electrolyte imbalance. Similarly, repeated saline
enemas can cause increased absorption of fluid and
electrolytes into the bloodstream, resulting in overload. Individuals receiving frequent enemas should
be observed for overload symptoms that include dizziness, sweating, or vomiting.
Soap suds and saline used for cleansing enemas
can cause irritation of the lining of the bowel, with
repeated use or a solution that is too strong. Only
white soap should be used; the bar should not have
been previously used, to prevent infusing undesirable
organisms into the individual receiving the enema.
Common household detergents are considered too
strong for the rectum and bowel. The commercially
prepared castile soap is preferred, and should be used
in concentration no greater than 5 cc soap to 1,000 cc
of water.
Description
Cleansing enemas act by stimulation of bowel
activity through irritation of the lower bowel, and by
distention with the volume of fluid instilled. When the
enema is administered, the individual is usually lying
on the left side, which places the sigmoid colon (lower
portion of bowel) below the rectum and facilitates
infusion of fluid. The length of time it takes to administer an enema depends on the amount of fluid to be
infused. The amount of fluid administered will vary
depending on the age and size of the person receiving
the enema, however general guidelines would be:
 Infant: 250 cc or less
 Toddler and preschooler: 500 cc or less
 School-aged child: 500–1,000 cc
 Adult: 750–1,000 cc
Some may differentiate between high and low
enemas. A high enema, given to cleanse as much of
the large bowel as possible, is usually administered at
higher pressure and with larger volume (1,000 cc),
and the individual changes position several times in
order for the fluid to flow up into the bowel. A low
enema, intended to cleanse only the lower bowel, is
administered at lower pressure, using about 500 cc of
fluid.
Oil retention enemas serve to lubricate the rectum
and lower bowel, and soften the stool. For adults,
about 150–200 cc of oil is instilled, while in small
children, 75–150 cc of oil is considered adequate.
Salad oil or liquid petrolatum are commonly used at
a temperature of 918F (32.88C). There are also commercially prepared oil retention enemas. The oil is
usually retained for one to three hours before it is
expelled.
The rectal tube used for infusion of the solution,
usually made of rubber or plastic, has two or more
openings at the end through which the solution can
flow into the bowel. The distance to which the tube
must be inserted is dependent upon the age and size of
the patient. For adult, insertion is usually 3–4 in
(7.5–10 cm); for children, approximately 2–3 in
(5–7.5 cm); and for infants, only 1–1.5 in (2.5–3.75 cm).
The rectal tube is lubricated before insertion with a
water soluble lubricant to ease insertion and decrease
irritation to the rectal tissues.
The higher the container of solution is placed, the
greater the force in which the fluid flows into the
patient. Routinely, the container should be no higher
than 12 in (30 cm) above the level of the bed; for a
high cleansing enema, the container may be 12–18 in
(30–45 cm) above the bed level, because the fluid is to
be instilled higher into the bowel.Preparation
The solution used in the procedure is measured,
mixed, and warmed before administration of the enema.
Aftercare
If necessary, a specimen will be collected for diagnostic evaluation. If the enema was given to alleviate
constipation, the better approach to combatting constipation in the future is with a high fiber diet (five to
six servings of whole grain foods) and adequate fluid
intake (seven to eight glasses of water per day).
Regular exercise and going to the bathroom when
necessary will also help. If constipation is a chronic
problem, medical help should be consulted to determine if there is underlying disorder.
Risks
Habitual use of enemas as a means to combat
constipation can make the problem even more severe
when their use is discontinued. Enemas should be used
only as a last resort for treatment of constipation and
with a doctor’s recommendation. Enemas should not
be administered to individuals who have recently had
colon or rectal surgery, a heart attack, or who suffer
from an unknown abdominal condition or an irregular heartbeat.