Definition
A non-cancerous condition that affects many men
past 50 years of age, enlarged prostate makes urinating
more difficult by narrowing the urethra, a tube running from the bladder through the prostate gland. It
can be effectively treated by surgery and, today, by
certain drugs.
Description
The common term for enlarged prostate is BPH,
which stands for benign (non-cancerous) prostatic hyperplasia or hypertrophy. Hyperplasia means that the prostate cells are dividing too rapidly, increasing the total
number of cells, and, therefore, the size of the organ itself.
Hypertrophy simply means ‘‘enlargement.’’ BPH is part
of the aging process. The actual changes in the prostate
may start as early as the 30s but take place very gradually,
so that significant enlargement and symptoms usually do
not appear until after age 50. Past this age the chances of
the prostate enlarging and causing urinary symptoms
become progressively greater. More than 40% of men
in their 70s have an enlarged prostate. Symptoms generally appear between ages 55–75. About 10% of all men
eventually will require treatment for BPH.
BPH has been viewed as a rare condition in
African, Chinese, and other Asian peoples for reasons
that are not clear.
Causes and symptoms
The cause of BPH is a mystery, but age-related
changes in the levels of hormones circulating in the
blood may be a factor. Whatever the cause, an enlarging
prostate gradually narrows the urethra and obstructs the
flow of urine. Even though the muscle in the bladder wall
becomes strongerin an attempt to push urine through the
smaller urethra, in time, the bladder fails to empty completely at each urination. The urine that collects in the
bladdercanbecomeinfected andlead to stone formation.
The kidneys themselves may be damaged by infection or
by urine constantly ‘‘backing up.’’
When the enlarging prostate gland narrows the
urethra, a man will have increasing trouble starting
the urine stream. Because some urine remains behind
in the bladder, he will have to urinate more often,
perhaps two or three times at night (nocturia). The
need to urinate can become very urgent and, in time,
urine may dribble out to stain a man’s clothing. Other
symptoms of BPH are a weak and sometimes a split stream and general aching or pain in the perineum (the
area between the scrotum and anus). Some men may
have considerable enlargement of the prostate before
even mild symptoms develop.
If a man must strain hard to force out the urine,
small veins in the bladder wall and urethra may rupture,
causing blood to appear in the urine. If the urinary
stream becomes totally blocked, the urine collecting in
the bladder may cause severe discomfort, a condition
called acute urinary retention. Urine that stagnates in
the bladder can easily become infected. A burning feeling during urination and fever are clues that infection
may have developed. Finally, if urine backs up long
enough it may increase pressure in the kidneys, though
this rarely causes permanent kidney damage.
Diagnosis
When a man’s symptoms point to BPH, the first
thing the physician will want to do is a digital rectal
examination, inserting a finger into the anus to feel
whether—and how much—the prostate is enlarged. A
smooth prostate surface suggests BPH, whereas a distinct lump in the gland might mean prostate cancer. The
next step is a blood test for a substance called prostatespecific antigen or PSA. Between 30–50% of men with
BPH have an elevated PSA level. This does not mean
cancer by any means, but other measures are needed to
make sure that the prostate enlargement is in fact
benign. An ultrasound exam of the prostate, which is
entirely safe and delivers no radiation, can show whether
it is enlarged and may show that cancer is present.
If digital or ultrasound examination of the prostate raises the suspicion of cancer, most urologists will
recommend that a prostatic tissue biopsy be performed. This is usually done using a lance-like instrument that is inserted into the rectum. It pierces the
rectal wall and, guided by the physcian’s finger,
obtains six to eight pieces of prostatic tissue that are
sent to the laboratory for microscopic examination. If
cancer is present, the prognosis and treatment are
changed accordingly.
A catheter placed through the urethra and into the
bladder can show how much urine remains in the
bladder after the patient urinates—a measure of how
severe the obstruction is. Another and very simple test
for obstruction is to have the man urinate into a uroflowmeter, which measures the rate of urine flow. A
very certain—though invasive—way of confirming
obstruction from an enlarged prostate is to pass a
special viewing instrument called a cystoscope into
the bladder, but this is not often necessary.It is routine to check a urine sample for an
increased number of white blood cells, which may
mean there is infection of the bladder or kidneys.
The same sample may be cultured to show what
type of bacterium is causing the infection, and
which antibiotics will work best. The state of the
kidneys may be checked in two ways: imaging by
either ultrasound or injecting a dye (the intravenous
urogram, or pyelogram); or a blood test for creatinine, which collects in the blood when the kidneys
cannot eliminate it.
Treatment
Drugs
A class of drugs called alpha-adrenergic blockers,
which includes phenoxybenzamine and doxazosin,
relax the muscle tissue surrounding the bladder outlet
and lining the wall of the urethra to permit urine to
flow more freely. These drugs improve obstructive
symptoms, but do not keep the prostate from enlarging. Other drugs (finasteride is a good example) do
shrink the prostate and may delay the need for surgery. Symptoms may not, however, improve until the
drug has been used for three months or longer.
Antibiotic drugs are given promptly whenever infection is diagnosed. Some medications, including antihistamines and some decongestants, can make the
symptoms of BPH suddenly worse and even cause
acute urinary retention, and therefore should be
avoided.
Intermediate treatments
When drugs have failed to control symptoms of
BPH but the physician does not believe that conventional surgery is yet needed, a procedure called
transurethral needle ablation may be tried. In the
office and using local anesthesia, a needle is inserted
into the prostate and radiofrequency energy is
applied to destroy the tissue that is obstructing
urine flow. Another new approach is microwave
hyperthermia, using a device called the Prostatron
to deliver microwave energy to the prostate through
a catheter. This procedure is done at an outpatient
surgery center.
Surgery
For many years the standard operation for BPH
has been transurethral resection (TUR) of the prostate. Under general or spinal anesthesia, a cystoscope
is passed through the urethra and prostate tissue surrounding the urethra is removed using either a cutting
instrument or a heated wire loop. The small pieces of
prostate tissue are washed out through the scope. No
incision is needed for TUR. There normally is some
blood in the urine for a few days following the procedure. In a few men—less than 5% of all those having
TUR—urine will continue to escape unintentionally.
Other uncommon complications include a temporary
rise in blood pressure with mental confusion, which is
treated by giving salt solution. Impotence—the inability to achieve lasting penile erections—does occur, but
probably in fewer than 10% of patients. A narrowing
or stricture rarely develops in the urethra, but this can
be treated fairly easily.
Alternatives to TUR, some only recently introduced, include:
 Laser ablation of the prostate. Laser energy is
applied to the prostate through a special fiber passed
through a cystoscope. The procedure is done in an
operating room, and several patients have retained
urine postoperatively.
 Transurethral incision of the prostate. Less invasive
than standard TUR, an incision is made through the
prostate to open up the part of the urethra passing
through it. This may work well in men whose prostate is not grossly enlarged.
 Transurethral vaporization. A small roller ball is
used to break up and vaporize the obstructing prostatic tissue, rather than cutting it away as in standard TUR. This is equally successful but patients
usually can leave the hospital within 24 hours, and
there is less blood loss.
 If the prostate is greatly enlarged—as is the case in
about 5–10% of those diagnosed – an incision is
made to perform an open prostatectomy, removing
the entire gland under direct vision.
Alternative treatment
An extract of the saw palmetto (Serenoa repens or S. serrulata) has been shown to stop or decrease the
hyperplasia of the prostate. Symptoms of BPH will
improve after taking the herb for one to two months,
but continued use is recommended.
Prognosis
In a man without symptoms whose prostate is
enlarged, it is hard to predict when urinary symptoms
will develop and how rapidly they will progress. For
this reasons some specialists (urologists) advise a period of ‘‘watchful waiting.’’ When BPH is treated by
conventional TUR, there is a small risk of complications but, in the great majority of men, urinary symptoms will be relieved and their quality of life
will be much enhanced. In the future, it is possible that
the less invasive forms of surgical treatment will be
increasingly used to achieve results as good as those of
the standard operation. It also is possible that new
medications will be developed that shrink the prostate
and eliminate obstructive symptoms so that surgery
can be avoided altogether.
Prevention
Whether or not BPH is caused by hormonal
changes in aging men, there is no known way of preventing it. Once it does develop and symptoms are
present that interfere seriously with the patient’s life,
timely medical or surgical treatment will reliably prevent symptoms from getting worse. Also, if the condition is treated before the prostate has become grossly
enlarged, the risk of complications is minimal. One of
the potentially most serious complications of BPH,
urinary infection (and possible infection of the kidneys), can be prevented by using a catheter to drain
excess urine out of the bladder so that it does not
collect, stagnate, and become infected.