Definition
Enteroviruses are so named because they reproduce initially in the gastrointestinal tract after infection occurs. Despite, this, they usually do not lead to
intestinal symptoms; rather it is their spread to organs,
such as the nervous system, heart, skin, and others that
causes disease. Enteroviruses are part of a larger group
of viruses known as Picornaviruses. The word comes
from the combination of ‘‘pico’’ (Spanish, meaning ‘‘a
little bit’’), and RNA (ribonucleic acid, an important
component of genetic material).
Description
There are four groups of enteroviruses:
Coxsackievirus, Echovirus, ungrouped Enterovirus,
and Y Poliovirus.
Viruses are generally divided into those that use
DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) or RNA as their genetic
material; all enteroviruses are RNA viruses. They are
found worldwide, but infection is more common in
areas of poor hygiene and overcrowding.
Although most cases of enterovirus do not produce symptoms, some five to 10 million individuals in
the United States each year suffer from one of the
enteroviral diseases. Illness is more common in the
very young. While there are close to 70 different
strains of enteroviruses, over 70% of infections are
caused by only 10 types.
The virus is most commonly transmitted by the
fecal-oral route (contamination of fingers or objects
by human waste material); in some instances transmission is through contaminated food or water.
Passage of some strains of virus by way of air droplets
can lead to respiratory illness. Infection of fetuses by
way of the placenta also has been documented. Breast
milk contains antibodies which can protect
newborns.
The incubation period for most enteroviruses
ranges from two to 14 days. In areas of temperate
climate, infections occur mainly in the summer and fall.
Causes and symptoms
Enteroviruses are believed to be the cause of at
least 10 distinct illnesses. Once they enter the body,
they multiply in the cells that line the gastrointestinal
tract, and eventually reach sites of lymphatic tissue
(such as the tonsils). While most of these diseases are
of short duration and do not cause significant injury,
some can produce severe illness. Each presents its own
unique symptoms. And a 2003 report to the Infectious
Diseases Society of America reminded physicians that
infants with enteroviral infections often present early
in their illnesses with no signs of fever, complicating
diagnosis.
The main syndromes caused by the various enteroviruses are the following:
 Summer grippe (nonspecific febrile illness). This is
the most common syndrome, and is characterized by
flu-like symptoms of fever, headache, and weakness,
that typically last three to four days. Many patients
also develop upper respiratory symptoms and some
nausea and vomiting. One of the major ways to
distinguish this disease from influenza, is the fact
that grippe most often occurs in the summer.
 Generalized disease of the newborn is a potentially
serious infection in which infants from one week to
three months of age develop a syndrome that can be
difficult to distinguish from a severe bacterial infection. Fever, irritability, and decreased responsiveness
or excessive sleepiness are the major symptoms.
Inflammation of heart muscle (myocarditis), low
blood pressure, hepatitis, and meningitis sometimes
complicate the illness.
 Aseptic meningitis encephalitis is a well known syndrome caused by this group of viruses. In fact, enteroviruses are responsible for over 90% of cases of
aseptic meningitis, and most often hit children and
young adults. Headache, fever, avoidance of light,
and eye pain are characteristic. Drowsiness may be
prominent, and other symptoms include sore throat,
cough, muscle pain, and rash. Occasionally, not only
the meninges;mdash;the covering around the brain
and spinal cord;mdash;is infected, but also brain
tissue itself, producing encephalitis. The illness
resolves after about a week or so, and permanent
damage is unusual. Enteroviruses can also produce
the Guillian-Barre´ syndrome, which involves weakness and paralysis of the extremities and even the
muscles of respiration.
 Pleurodynia (Bornholm’s disease) is due to viral
infection and inflammation of the chest and abdominal muscles used for breathing. Pain occurs as acute
episodes, lasting 30 minutes or so. Coxsackie B virus
is the usual cause of the illness.
 Myocarditis and/or pericarditis involves infection
of the heart muscle (myocardium) and the covering
around the heart (pericardium). Infants and young
adults are the most susceptible, and for some reason, more than two-thirds of cases occur in males.
The disease usually begins as an upper respiratory
tract infection with cough, shortness of breath, and
fever. Chest pain, increasing shortness of breath,
irregularities of cardiac rhythm, and heart failure
sometimes develop. Some patients wind up with
long-term heart failure if the heart muscle is significantly affected.
 Exanthems is the medical term for rashes, and enterovirus is the number one cause of summer and fall
rashes in children. They occur anywhere on the body,
and often resemble diseases such as measles.
 Hand-foot-and-mouth disease occurs initially as a
sore throat (often involving the tongue as well), and
is followed by a rash on the hands, and sometimes the
feet. The rash often forms small blisters, which lead
to ulcers. Symptoms generally resolve within a week.
A specific Coxsackievirus (A16) is the most frequent
cause of this highly infectious disease.
 Herpangina is most often caused by one of the
Coxsackie A viruses, and appears as the acute onset
of fever and sore throat. This last symptom is particularly severe, as the virus produces multiple ulcers
in the throat. Swallowing becomes very painful;
symptoms can persist for several weeks.
 Acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis involves viral
infection of the conjunctiva, which is a covering
around the eye. Pain, blurred vision, aversion to
light, and a discharge from the eye are the main
symptoms. Headache and fever occur in about one
in five patients. The disease runs its course in about
10 days.
A number of other illnesses have been attributed
to enteroviruses, including pneumonia and other
respiratory infections, myositis or muscle inflammation, arthritis, and acute inflammation of the kidneys.
It is clear then that these viruses produce a number of
various illnesses, most often in younger age groups.
Diagnosis
In the majority of cases, diagnosis is based on the
characteristic symptoms that the virus produces (such
as the chest pain in pleurodynia). Rarely is it necessary
to identify a specific strain of virus causing the illness.
It is more important to be certain that the infection is
due to a virus that does not require treatment with
antibiotics.
Culture, or growing the organism outside of the
body, is helpful only when obtained from areas that
tend to indicate recent infection, such as from swollen
joints, cerebrospinal fluid, or blood. Cultures from
other areas, such as the throat, can be misleading.
This is because the virus may remain for long periods
of time in places with a large amount of lymphatic
tissue. As a rule, cultures done early in the illness are
more likely to identify the virus.
New techniques that involve identification of viral
genetic material (PCR) are useful in certain cases, but
are not indicated for routine testing.
Treatment
As noted above, enterovirus is capable of attacking many different organs and producing a variety of
symptoms. Most infections are mild and improve
without complications, requiring no specific therapy.
When the virus attacks critical organs however, such
as the heart, respiratory muscles, nervous system, etc.,
specialized care is often needed.
As of 2001, no effective antiviral medication for
enterovirus has undergone investigation in patients,
though some drugs appeared promising for the future.
In some patients who are unable to produce antibodies
(hypogammaglobunemia), administrating antibodies
themselves is helpful.
Prognosis
The overall outlook for enterovirus infection
depends on the organs involved, and the immune
condition of the individual patient. Unless vital
organs are involved or immunity is abnormal, infection causes few problems. On the other hand,
patients who have diseases that affect antibody production can develop chronic infection of the brain
or meninges. A 2003 study found that enterovirus
infections can increase the risk of type 1 diabetes
in children who are genetically predisposed to
diabetes.
Prevention
In the hospital setting, the best means of avoiding
transmission of infection is the use of good handwashing practices and other appropriate precautions
(gowns and gloves for hospital staff). The virus is
found in feces for up to one week after infection;
therefore precautions that isolate waste material
(enteric precautions) will help decrease the chance of
spreading the illness.
