Definition
Enyzme therapy is a plan of dietary supplements
of plant and animal enzymes used to facilitate the
digestive process and improve the body’s ability to
maintain balanced metabolism.
Purpose
In traditional medicine, enzyme supplements are
often prescribed for patients suffering from disorders
that affect the digestive process, such as cystic fibrosis,
Gaucher’s disease, and celiac disease. A program of
enzyme supplementation is rarely recommended for
healthy patients. However, proponents of enzyme therapy believe that such a program is beneficial for everyone. They point to enzymes’ ability to purify the blood,
strengthen the immune system, enhance mental capacity,
cleanse the colon, and maintain proper pH balance in
urine. They feel that by improving the digestive process,
the body is better able to combat infection and disease.
Some evidence exists that pancreatic enzymes
derived from animal sources are helpful in cancer
treatment. The enzymes may be able to dissolve the
coating on cancer cells and may make it easier for the
immune system to attack the cancer.
A partial list of the wide variety of complaints and
illnesses that can be treated by enzyme therapy includes:
 AIDS
 anemia
 alcohol consumption
 anxiety
 acute inflammation
 back pain
 cancer
 colds
 chronic fatigue syndrome
 colitis
 constipation
 diarrhea
 food allergies
 gastritis
 gastric duodenal ulcer
 gout
 headaches
 hepatitis
 hypoglycemia
 infections
 mucous congestion
 multiple sclerosis
 nervous disorders
 nutritional disorders
 obesity
 premenstrual syndrome (PMS)
 stress
Description
Origins
Enzymes are protein molecules used by the body
to perform all of its chemical actions and reactions.
The body manufactures several thousands of enzymes.
Among them are the digestive enzymes produced by
the stomach, pancreas, small intestine, and the salivary glands of the mouth. Their energy-producing
properties are responsible for not only the digestion
of nutrients, but their absorption, transportation,
metabolization, and elimination as well.
Enzyme therapy is based on the work of Dr.
Edward Howell in the 1920s and 1930s. Howell proposed that enzymes from foods work in the stomach to
pre-digest food. He advocated the consumption of
large amounts of plant enzymes, theorizing that if the
body had to use less of its own enzymes for digestion, it
could store them for maintaining metabolic harmony.
Four categories of plant enzymes are helpful in predigestion: protease, amylase, lipase, and cellulase.
Cellulase is particularly helpful because the body is
unable to produce it.
Animal enzymes, such as pepsin extracted from
the stomach of pigs, work more effectively in the duodenum. They are typically used for the treatment of
nondigestive ailments.
The seven categories of food enzymes and their
activities
 amylase breaks down starches
 cellulase breaks down fibers
 lactase breaks down dairy products
 lipase breaks down fats
 maltase breaks down grains
 protease breaks down proteins
 sucrase breaks down sugars
 Enzyme theory generated further interest as the
human diet became more dependent on processed and
cooked foods. Enzymes are extremely sensitive to
heat, and temperatures above 1188F (488C) destroy
them. Modern processes of pasteurization, canning,
and microwaving are particularly harmful to the
enzymes in food.
Enzyme supplements are extracted from plants
like pineapple and papaya and from the organs of
cows and pigs. The supplements are typically given in
tablet or capsule form. Pancreatic enzymes may also
be given by injection. The dosage varies with the condition being treated. For nondigestive ailments, the
supplements are taken in the hour before meals so
that they can be quickly absorbed into the blood.
For digestive ailments, the supplements are taken
immediately before meals accompanied by a large
glass of fluids. Pancreatic enzymes may be accompanied by doses of vitamin A.
Preparations
No special preparations are necessary before
beginning enzyme therapy. However, it is always advisable to talk to a doctor or pharmacist before purchasing enzymes and beginning therapy.
Precautions
People with allergies to beef, pork, pineapples, and
papaya may suffer allergic reactions to enzyme supplements. Tablets are often coated to prevent them from
breaking down in the stomach, and usually shouldn’t
be chewed or crushed. People who have difficulty
swallowing pills can request enzyme supplements in
capsule form. The capsules can then be opened and
the contents sprinkled onto soft foods like applesauce.
Side effects
Side effects associated with enzyme therapy
include heartburn, nausea and vomiting, diarrhea,
bloating, gas, and acne. According to the principles
of therapy, these are temporary cleansing symptoms.
Drinking eight to 10 glasses of water daily and getting
regular exercise can reduce the discomfort of these
side effects. Individuals may also experience an
increase in bowel movements, perhaps one or two
per day. This is also considered a positive effect.
Plant enzymes are safe for pregnant women,
although they should always check with a doctor
before using enzymes. Pregnant women should avoid
animal enzymes. In rare cases, extremely high doses of
enzymes can result in a build up of uric acid in the
blood or urine and can cause a break down of proteins.
Research and general acceptance
In the United States, the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) has classified enzymes as a
food. Therefore, they can be purchased without a prescription. However, insurance coverage is usually
dependent upon the therapy resulting from a doctor’s
orders.