Definition
Eosinophilic pneumonia is a group of diseases in
which there is an above normal number of eosinophils
in the lungs and blood.
Description
Eosinophilia is an increase in the number of
eosinophils. Eosinophilic pneumonia is characterized by a large number of eosinophils in the lungs,
usually in the absence of an infectious disease.
Eosinophils are one of the white blood cells and
are classified as a granulocyte. They are part of
the non-specific immune system and participate
in inflammatory reactions. Eosinophils contain
cationic molecules that are useful for destroying
infectious agents, especially heiminthic parasites
(worms). There are several types of eosinophilic
pneumonia. Loffler’s pneumonia is a temporary
infiltration of eosinophils into the lungs. The patient
will feel tired, have a cough, spasms of the bronchial
airway, and difficulty breathing. Loffler’s pneumonia will clear spontaneously, but slowly over the
course of about a month. Another form of eosinophilic pneumonia, pulmonary infiltrates with eosinophilia (PIE), is a more serious and potentially fatal
disease. In PIE, the patient experiences asthma,
pulmonary infiltrates, disorders of the peripheral
nervous system, central nervous systems symptoms,
and periarteritis nodosa.
Causes and symptoms
Pneumonia with eosinophils occurs as part of a
hypersensitivity reaction. A hypersensitivity reaction
is an over-reaction of the immune system to a particular
stimulus. As part of the hypersensitive reaction, cells of
the immune system are produced in increased numbers
and migrate into areas targeted by the hypersensitivity
reaction. In the case of eosinophilic pneumonia, the
lungs are the target. Generally, eosinophilia pneumonia
is not a reaction to an infection. There is a correlation
between asthma and eosinophilic pneumonia.
Eosinophilic pneumonia can also be caused by drugs
and, in some people, by polluted air. The symptoms
range from mild (coughing, wheezing, and shortness of
breath) to severe and life threatening (severe shortness
of breath and difficulty getting enough oxygen). The
symptoms may resolve spontaneously or can persist
for long periods of time. In a few cases, the disease
may rapidly produce life-threatening pneumonia.
Diagnosis
Since eosinophilia is common to a number of
conditions, the physician must rule out asthma and
infection by helminths when diagnosing eosinophilic
pneumonia. A whole blood count will reveal an
increased number of eosinophils in the blood. An x
ray of the lungs may show the presence of infiltrates
(the eosinophils and fluid). If sputum is produced in
coughing, eosinophils will be seen instead of the more
normal profile of granulocytes seen when an infectious
agent is present.
Treatment
Eosinophilic pneumonia may not respond to
drugs used to treat asthma. Eosinophilic pneumonia
is usually treated with steroids, particularly glucocorticosteroids. Steroids are not effective against
infectious agents, but the main disease process in eosinophilic pneumonia is an inflammatory reaction, not a
response to infection. When eosinophilia is produced
as a consequence of asthma or an infection by
helminths, treatment of the asthma or helminths will
reduce the eosinophilia.