Definition
Epidermolysis bullosa (EB) is a group of rare
inherited skin diseases that are characterized by
the development of blisters following minimal
pressure to the skin. Blistering often appears in
infancy in response to simply being held or handled.
In rarer forms of the disorder, EB can be life-threatening. There is no cure for the disorder. Treatment
focuses on preventing and treating wounds and
infection.
Description
Epidermolysis bullosa has three major forms and
at least 16 subtypes. The three major forms are EB
simplex, junctional EB, and dystrophic EB. These
can range in severity from mild blistering to more
disfiguring and life-threatening disease. Physicians
diagnose the form of the disease based on where the
blister forms in relation to the epidermis (the skin’s
outermost layer) and the deeper dermis layer.
The prevalence of epidermolysis varies among
different populations. A study in Scotland estimated
the prevalence to be one in 20,400. Researchers in
other parts of the world estimate the prevalence to be
one in 100,000. This variance is due to the variability
of expression. Many cases of epidermolysis bullosa are
often not accurately diagnosed and thus, are not
reported.
Causes and symptoms
EB can be inherited as the result of a dominant
genetic abnormality (only one parent carries the
abnormal gene) or a recessive genetic abnormality
(both parents carry the abnormal gene).
EB simplex results from mutations in genes
responsible for keratin 5 and 14, which are proteins
that give cells of the epidermis its structure. EB
simplex is transmitted in an autosomal dominant
fashion.
Dystrophic EB is caused by mutations in genes for
type VII collagen, the protein contained in the fibers
anchoring the epidermis to the deeper layers of the
skin. The genetic mutations for junctional EB are
found in the genes responsible for producing the
protein Laminin-5. Dystrophic EB is an autosomal
disorder and will only result if both parents transmit
an abnormal gene during conception.
EB simplex, the most common form of EB, is the
least serious form of the disease. In most affected
individuals, the blisters are mild and do not scar after
they heal. Some forms of EB simplex affect just the
hands and feet. Other forms of EB simplex can lead to
more widespread blistering, as well as hair loss and
missing teeth. Recurrent blistering is annoying but not
life threatening.
The second, or junctional, form of EB does not
lead to scarring. However, skin on the areas prone to
blistering, such as elbows and knees, often shrinks. In
one variation of junctional EB, called gravis junctional
EB of Herlitz, the blistering can be so severe that
affected infants may not survive due to massive
infection and dehydration.
The third form of EB, dystrophic EB, varies
greatly in terms of severity, but more typically affects
the arms and legs. In one variation, called HallopeauSiemens EB, repeated blistering and scarring of the
hands and feet causes the fingers and toes to fuse,
leaving them dysfunctional and with a mitten-like
appearance.
Diagnosis
Physicians and researchers distinguish between
the three major subtypes of EB based on which layer
of the epidermis separates from the deeper dermis
layer of the skin below. Patients suspected of having
EB should have a fresh blister biopsied for review.
This sample of tissue is examined under an electron
microscope or under a conventional microscope using
a technique called immunofluorescence, which helps
to map the underlying structure.
Knowing that a family member has EB can help
establish the diagnosis, but it is possible that parents
or siblings will show no sign of the disease, either
because it is caused by a new genetic mutation, or
because the parents are carriers of the recessive trait
and do not display the disease.
Treatment
The most important treatment for EB is daily
wound care. Because the skin is very fragile, care
must be taken to be certain that dressing changes do
not cause further damage. Tape should not be applied
directly to skin and bandages should be soaked off.
Infection is a major concern, so a topical antibiotic,
such as bacitracin, mupirocin, or sulfadiazine, should
be routinely applied. Among persons with recessive
dystrophic EB, the anticonvulsant phenytoin is sometimes effective because it decreases production of an
enzyme that breaks down collagen.
Prognosis
The prognosis of EB varies depending on the
subtype of the disease. Individuals with EB simplex
can live long, fulfilling lives. The severity of the junctional and dystrophic forms of EB can vary greatly.
Infants affected with some forms of the disease often
do not survive infancy; other forms can lead to severe
scarring and disfigurement.