Definition
An episiotomy is a surgical incision made in the
area between the vagina and anus (perineum). This is
done during the last stages of labor and delivery to
expand the opening of the vagina to prevent tearing
during the delivery of the baby.
Purpose
This procedure is usually done during the delivery
or birthing process when the vaginal opening does not
stretch enough to allow the baby to be delivered without tearing the surrounding tissue.
Precautions
Prior to the onset of labor, pregnant women may
want to discuss the use of episiotomy with their care
providers. It is possible that, with adequate preparation and if the stages of labor and delivery are managed with adequate coaching and support, the need for
an episiotomy may be reduced.
Description
An episiotomy is a surgical incision, usually made
with sterile scissors, in the perineum as the baby’s head
is being delivered. This procedure may be used if the
tissue around the vaginal opening begins tearing or
does not seem to be stretching enough to allow the
baby to be delivered.
In most cases, the physician makes a midline incision along a straight line from the lowest edge of the
vaginal opening to toward the anus. In other cases, the
episiotomy is performed by making a diagonal incision across the midline between the vagina and anus.
This method is used much less often, may be more
painful, and may require more healing time than the
midline incision. After the baby is delivered through
the extended vaginal opening, the incision is closed
with stitches. A local anesthetic agent may be applied
or injected to numb the area before it is sewn up
(sutured).
Several reasons are cited for performing episiotomies. Some experts believe that an episiotomy
speeds up the birthing process, making it easier for
the baby to be delivered. This can be important if there
is any sign of distress that may harm the mother or
baby. Because tissues in this area may tear during the
delivery, another reason for performing an episiotomy
is that a clean incision is easier to repair than a jagged
tear and may heal faster. Although the use of episiotomy is sometimes described as protecting the pelvic
muscles and possibly preventing future problems with
urinary incontinence, it is not clear that the procedure
actually helps.
The use of episiotomy during the birthing process
is fairly widespread in the United States. Estimates of
episiotomy use in hospitals range from 65–95% of
deliveries, depending on how many times the mother
has given birth previously. This routine use of episiotomy is being reexamined in many hospitals and
health care settings. However, an episiotomy is always
necessary during a forceps delivery because of the size
of the forceps.
Preparation
It may be possible to avoid the need for an
episiotomy. Pregnant women may want to talk with
their care providers about the use of episiotomy
during the delivery. Kegel exercises are often recommended during the pregnancy to help strengthen the
pelvic floor muscles. Prenatal perineal massage may
help to stretch and relax the tissue around the vaginal
opening. During the delivery process, warm compresses can be applied to the area along with the use
of perineal massage. Coaching and support are also
important during the delivery process. A slowed,
controlled pushing during the second stage of labor
(when the mother gets the urge to push) may allow
the tissues to stretch rather than tear. Also, an upright
birthing position (rather than one where the mother is
lying down) may decrease the need for an episiotomy.
Aftercare
The area of the episiotomy may be uncomfortable
or even painful for several days. Several practices can
relieve some of the pain. Cold packs can be applied to
the perineal area to reduce swelling and discomfort.
Use of the Sitz bath available at the hospital or birth
center can ease the discomfort, too. This unit circulates warm water over the area. A squirt bottle with
water can be used to clean the area after urination or
defecation rather than wiping with tissue. Also, the
area should be patted dry rather than wiped.
Cleansing pads soaked in witch hazel (such as Tucks)
are very effective for cleaning the area and also feel
soothing.
Risks
Several side effects of episiotomy have been
reported, including infection, increased pain, prolonged healing time, and increased discomfort once
sexual intercourse is resumed. There is also the risk
that the episiotomy incision will be deeper or longer
than is necessary to permit the birth of the infant.
There is a risk of increased bleeding.
Normal results
In a normal and well managed delivery, an episiotomy may be avoided altogether. If an episiotomy is
deemed to be necessary, a simple midline incision
will be made to extend the vaginal opening without
additional tearing or extensive trauma to the perineal
area. Although there may be some pain associated with
the healing of the episiotomy incision, relief can usually be provided with mild pain relievers and supportive
measures, such as the application of cold packs.
Abnormal results
An episiotomy incision that is too long or deep
may extend into the rectum, causing more bleeding
and an increased risk of infection. Additional tearing
or tissue damage may occur beyond the episiotomy
incision, leaving a cut and a tear to be repaired.