Definition
Drugs and devices that treat erectile dysfunction
(ED), the inability to achieve or maintain an erection
long enough to engage in sexual intercourse.
Purpose
The purpose of ED treatment is to allow men to
achieve and maintain an erection of sufficient strength
and duration to engage in sexual intercourse.
Precautions
Because sexual activity can stress the heart, men
who have heart problems should check with their
physician to see if sexual activity is recommended.
Erectile dysfunction drugs may trigger temporary hypotension (low blood pressure) and is known to increase
cardiovascular nerve activity, so physicians should prescribe them with caution in men with a history of heart
attack, atherosclerosis (hardening of the arteries),
angina, arrhythmia, and chronic low blood pressure
problems. ED drugs are not labeled or approved for
use by women or children, or by men without erectile
dysfunction. Anyone experiencing cardiovascular
symptoms such as dizziness, chest or arm pain, and
nausea when participating in sexual activity after
taking an ED medication should stop the encounter.
They should also not take any ED drug again until
they have discussed the episode with their healthcare
provider. It is recommended that men with kidney or
liver impairments, and men over age 65, start at the
lowest possible dosage of ED medications.
Description
There are three prescription medications available
in the United States to treat the physical causes of ED:
sildenafil citrate (Viagra), vardenafil (Levitra), and
tadalafil (Cialis). They help about three-fourths of all
men who try them in the general population. Several
studies have indicated that their success rate in diabetic
men may be slightly lower, averaging around 60-65%.
All three pills work by enhancing the effects of nitric
oxide. This chemical relaxes muscles in the penis to
allow more blood to flow in. These pills do not cause
an erection by themselves. Sexual stimulation is also
required. Sildenafil or vardenafil should be taken about
an hour before sex. Each is effective for roughly four
hours. Tadalafil lasts for up to 36 hours. Men should
not have sex more than once every 24 hours after using
these drugs. Before Viagra’s approval in 1998, drug
treatment of erectile dysfunction was limited to alprostadil (prostaglandin), either injected into the penis or
inserted as a pellet into the urethra. Sales of the three
newer ED drugs reached $3.4 billion in 2004, according
to the research firm IMS Health. In 2004, Viagra had
about 66% of the market share for ED drugs compared
to 19% for Levitra and 14% for Cialis.
Viagra
Sildenafil was originally developed in 1991 as a
treatment for angina, or chest pain. The drug, marketed under the name Viagra, received FDA approval
as a treatment for erectile dysfunction in March 1998,
and since that time it has been prescribed for more
then 20 million men worldwide. It was the first oral
medication approved for ED treatment. Viagra is a
vasodilator, a drug that has the effect of dilating the
blood vessels. It works by improving blood circulation
to the penis, and by enhancing the effects of nitric
oxide, the agent that relaxes the smooth muscle of
the penis and regulates blood vessels during sexual
stimulation, allowing the penis to become engorged
and achieve an erection.
The average recommended dose of Viagra is 50
mg. It comes in doses of 25 mg., 50 mg., and 100 mg to.
The medication is taken approximately one hour
before sexual activity is planned, and may remain
effective for up to four hours. One drawback is
that to be effective, it should be taken on an empty
stomach. Also, high-fat foods can interfere with the
absorption of Viagra. Viagra does not increase sexual
desire. Sexual stimulation and arousal are required
for it to be effective.
Levitra
In early 2003, a second prescription drug to treat
erectile dysfunction, Levitra, was approved by the
FDA. Like Viagra, Levitra helps increase blood flow
to the penis and may help men with ED get and keep an
erection. Once a man has completed sexual activity,
blood flow to the penis should decrease and the
erection should go away. Levitra should be taken
approximately 60 minutes prior to sexual activity. In
clinical trials, most patients were able to begin sexual
activity before that time. A 2004 study showed that
about 50% of men taking Levitra experienced a firm
erection within 25 minutes and a small percentage in as
quickly as 10 minutes. Studies also showed that Levitra
improved erectile function in men who had other health
factors, such as diabetes or prostate surgery.
Men taking nitrate drugs, often used to control
chest pain (also known as angina), should not take
Levitra. Men who use alpha-blockers, sometimes
prescribed for high blood pressure or prostate
problems, also should not take Levitra. Such combinations could cause blood pressure to drop to an
unsafe level. Levitra is available in 2.5 mg, 5 mg, 10
mg, and 20 mg tablets.
Cialis
Cialis is the third oral drug prescribed to treat
erectile dysfunction, approved by the FDA in
November 2003. Its most notable difference from
Viagra and Levitra, which work for about four hours,
is that Cialis works for up to 36 hours. Cialis helps
increase blood flow in the penis when a man is sexually
stimulated. It can help men with ED get and keep an
erection satisfactory for sexual activity. Once a man has
completed sexual activity, blood flow to his penis
decreases, and his erection goes away. Cialis is clinically
proven to improve erectile function in most men with
ED, including those with mild, moderate or severe ED.
The most common side effects with Cialis are
headache, upset stomach, back pain, and muscle
aches. These side effects usually go away after a few
hours. Patients who get back pain and muscle aches
usually get it 12 to 24 hours after taking Cialis. Back
pain and muscle aches usually go away by themselves
within 48 hours.
Cialis comes in 5 mg., 10 mg. (the recommended
starting dose), and 20 mg. tablets. Since the absorption
of Cialis is not affected by food or high-fat foods, it
does not need to be taken on an empty stomach.
Studies show that in most men, Cialis begins working
in about 30 minutes and may be taken up to once per
day by most patients.
The cost of Viagra, Levitra, and Cialis is about
$10 per dose and is covered by most insurance plans.
Although the commercial availability of Viagra,
Levitra, and Cialis has been useful in many men,
prostate cancer patients and ED caused by psychological problems often require alternative treatment. A
commonly used alternative consists of a three-drug
injection containing alprostadil, papaverine hydrochloride, and phentolamine mesylate. Though it is
commonly referred to as the ‘‘Knoxville formula,’’
apparently for the city of its original introduction, a
number of slightly varying formulas have been in use
around the country. The three-drug preparation is
administered by injection into the corpora cavernosa
to induce erection.
Other traditional therapies for ED include
vacuum pump therapy, injection therapy involving
injecting a substance into the penis to enhance blood
flow, and a penile implantation device. In rare cases, if
narrowed or diseased veins are responsible for ED,
surgeons may reroute the blood flow into the corpora
cavernosa or remove leaking vessels.
In vacuum pump therapy, a man inserts his
penis into a clear plastic cylinder and uses a pump
to force air out of the cylinder. This forms a partial
vacuum around the penis, which helps to draw blood
into the corpora cavernosa. The man then places a
special ring over the base of the penis to trap the
blood inside it. The only side effect with this type of
treatment is occasional bruising if the vacuum is left
on too long.
Injection therapy involves injecting a substance
into the penis to enhance blood flow and cause an
erection. The FDA approved a drug called alprostadil
(Caverject) for this purpose in 1995. Alprostadil
relaxes smooth muscle tissue to enhance blood flow
into the penis. It must be injected shortly before intercourse. Another, similar drug that is sometimes used is
papaverine. Either drug may sometimes cause painful
erections or priapism that must be treated with a shot
of epinephrine. Alprostadil may also be administered
into the urethral opening of the penis. In MUSE
(medical urethral system for erection), the man inserts
a thin tube the width of a spaghetti noodle into his
urethral opening and presses down on a plunger to
deliver a tiny pellet containing alprostadil into his
penis. The drug takes about 10 minutes to work and
the erection lasts about an hour. The main side effect is
a sensation of pain and burning in the urethra, which
can last about five to 15 minutes. The injection process
itself is often painful
Implantable penile prostheses are usually considered a last resort for treating erectile dysfunction.
They are implanted in the corpora cavernosa to
make the penis rigid without the need for blood
flow. The semi-rigid type of prosthesis consists of a
pair of flexible silicone rods that can be bent up or
down. This type of device has a low failure rate
but, unfortunately, it causes the penis to always be
erect, which can be difficult to conceal under clothing.
The inflatable type of device consists of cylinders
that are implanted in the corpora cavernosa, a fluid
reservoir implanted in the abdomen, and a pump placed
in the scrotum. The man squeezes the pump to move
fluid into the cylinders and cause them to become rigid.
(He reverses the process by squeezing the pump again.)
While these devices allow for intermittent erections,
they have a slightly higher malfunction rate than the
silicon rods. Men can return to sexual activity six to
eight weeks after implantation surgery. Since implants
affect the corpora cavernosa, they permanently take
away a man’s ability to have a natural erection.
Preparation
No preparation is needed for Viagra, Levitra, or
Cialis.
Aftercare
The primary aftercare is to monitor blood pressure following use of ED medications.
Risks
Priapism, a prolonged erection, is a very rare
potential side effect of all prescription ED medications. Persons taking any erectile dysfunction
medication who have a prolonged erection, lasting
more than four hours, should seek immediate
medical attention. Priapism can cause damage to the
penis potentially leading to the permanent inability to
have an erection.
Normal results
The goal of all ED treatments is to achieve and
maintain an erection strong enough to engage in
sexual intercourse, which is usually 30-60 minutes.
Abnormal results
The most common abnormal response is the failure
to achieve and maintain and erection strong enough
and long enough to engage in sexual intercourse.