Definition
Erysipelas is a skin infection that often follows
strep throat.
Description
Erysipelas, also called St. Anthony’s fire, is caused
by infection by Group A Streptococci. This same type
of bacteria is responsible for such infections as strep
throat, and infections of both surgical and other kinds
of wounds in the skin. The infection occurs most often
in young infants and the elderly.
Causes and symptoms
Erysipelas usually occurs rather abruptly. When
the preceding infection was strep throat, the rash
begins on the face. Occasionally, when the preceding
infection was of a wound from an injury or operation,
the rash will appear on an arm or leg.
Classically, the usual presentation is a bright-red,
butterfly-shaped rash appearing across the bridge of the
nose and the cheeks. It is hot to the touch, painful, shiny,
and swollen, with clearly defined margins. The edges of
the rash are a raised ridge, hard to the touch. There may
be fluid-filled bumps scattered along the area. The rash
spreads rapidly. Some patients have swelling of the eyelids, sometimes so severe that their eyes swell shut. The
patient may have fever, chills, loss of energy, nausea and
vomiting, and swollen, tender lymph nodes. In severe cases, walled-off areas of pus (abscesses) may develop
beneath the skin. If left untreated, the streptococcal
bacteria may begin circulating in the bloodstream
(a condition called bacteremia). A patient may then
develop an overwhelming, systemic infection called
sepsis, with a high risk of death.
Diagnosis
The rash of erysipelas is very characteristic, raising the practitioner’s suspicion towards that diagnosis,
especially when coupled with a history of recent strep
infection. Attempts to culture (grow) the bacteria from
a sample of the rash usually fail. When the bacteria are
present in the blood, they may be grown in a laboratory, and identified under a microscope. Other laboratory tests involve reacting fluorescently-tagged
antibodies with a sample of the patient’s infected tissue. This type of test may be successful in positively
identifying the streptococcal bacteria.
Treatment
Penicillin is the drug of choice for treating erysipelas. It can usually be given by mouth, although
in severe cases (or in cases of diagnosed bacteremia)
it may be given through a needle placed in a vein
(intravenously).
Even with antibiotic treatment, swelling may continue to spread. Other symptoms, such as fever, pain,
and redness, usually decrease rapidly after penicillin is
started. Cold packs and pain relievers may help
decrease discomfort. Within about five to 10 days,
the affected skin may begin drying up and flaking off.
Prognosis
With prompt treatment, the prognosis from
erysipelas is excellent. Delay of treatment, however,
increases the chance for bacteremia and the potential for death from overwhelming sepsis. This is
particularly true of people with weakened immune
systems (babies, the elderly, and people ill with other
diseases, especially Acquired Immunodeficiency
Syndrome, or AIDS). Frequently, an individual
who has had erysipelas will have it occur again in
the same location.
Prevention
Prevention involves appropriate and complete
treatment of streptococcal infections, including strep
throat and wound infections.