Definition
Erythropoietin, also called EPO, is a type of
protein called a glycoprotein that is formed mainly
in the kidneys to stimulate the production of red
blood cells.
Purpose
The erythropoietin (EPO) test is used to determine if hormonal secretion is causing changes in the
red blood cells. The test has great value in evaluating
low hemoglobin (anemia), and another disorder
called polycythemia, in which unusually large numbers of red blood cells are found in the blood. The
EPO test is also used to identify kidney tumors
and identify or assess kidney disease It also may be
used to evaluate abuse by athletes who believe
commercially prepared erythropoietin enhances
performance.
Precautions
Not every laboratory is equipped to evaluate
EPO, so the reference laboratory (a large commercial
lab that does tests for hospitals not equipped to do
them) performing the test may require as many as four
days to complete the analysis. It should also be noted
that EPO values increase in pregnancy, in which significantly higher levels are found before the twentyfourth week.
Description
Erythropoietin is produced primarily in the kidneys but interacts with other factors in the bone marrow to increase red cell production. EPO is unique
among the blood cell growth factors, because it is the
only one that behaves like a hormone.
Erythropoietin acts as the principal regulator in
the production of red blood cells (erythrocytes) by
controlling the number, the kinds, and the survival
of the cells. Because of this ability, it is being investigated for use in cancer patients to prevent anemia
(hemoglobin concentration in the blood is lower
than normal), or to treat anemia that has been
induced by chemotherapy and bone marrow transplantation (BMT).
The correction of anemia can result in reduced
transfusion requirements, so the erythropoietin test is
used to diagnose anemia, including the anemia of endstage renal disease. Erythropoietin determination is
also valuable in diagnosing a condition known as
polycythemia, when increased numbers of red blood
cells occur. Levels of erythropoietin are extremely low
in polycythemia vera but are normal or high in secondary polycythemia. It happens rarely, but cysts in the
liver or kidneys, as well as tumors in the kidneys or
brain, can also produce erythropoietin. Patients with
these conditions can have high levels of erythropoietin
and may develop secondary polycythemia.
Kidney disease can cause anemia and many
patients on kidney dialysis will require monthly EPO
tests to check their hemoglobin levels.
Some athletes use EPO to enhance performance,
as the increased red cell volume adds more oxygencarrying capacity to the blood. Adverse reactions to
this practice can include clotting abnormalities, headache, seizures, high blood pressure, nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, and rash.
Preparation
The EPO test requires a blood sample. The patient
is to fast with nothing to eat or drink for at least eight
hours before the test. It is also suggested that the
patient lie down for 30 minutes before the test.
Risks
Risks for this test are minimal, but may include
slight bleeding from the blood-drawing site, fainting or feeling lightheaded after venipuncture,
and hematoma (blood accumulating under the
puncture site).
Normal results
Reference values vary from laboratory to laboratory, but a general normal range is 11–48 mU/ml
(milliunits per milliliter).
Abnormal results
Low levels of EPO are found in anemic patients
with inadequate or absent production of erythropoietin. Severe kidney disease may decrease production of EPO, and congenital absence of EPO can
occur.
Elevated levels of EPO can be found in some
anemias when the body tries to overcompensate for
reduced blood volume. Elevated levels are also seen
in polycythemia, and erythropoietin-secreting
tumors.