Definition
The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), or
sedimentation rate (sed rate), is a measure of the settling of red blood cells in a tube of blood during one
hour. The rate is an indication of inflammation and
increases in many diseases.
Purpose
ESR is increased in rheumatoid diseases, most
infections, and in cancer. An advanced rate doesn’t
diagnose a specific disease, but it does indicate that an
underlying disease may be present.
A physician can use ESR to monitor a person with
an associated disease. When the disease worsens, the ESR increases; when the disease improves, the ESR
decreases. The ESR doesn’t always follow the course
of cancer.
ESR is called an acute-phase reactant test, meaning that it reacts to acute conditions in the body, such
as infection or trauma. The rate increase follows a rise
in temperature and white blood cells count, peaks after
several days, and usually lasts longer than the elevated
temperature or white blood cells count.
Precautions
The ESR should not be used to screen healthy
persons for disease.
Description
The ESR test is a simple test dating back to the
ancient Greeks. A specific amount of diluted,
unclotted blood is placed in a special narrow tube
and left undisturbed for exactly one hour. The red
cells settle towards the bottom of the tube, and the
pale yellow liquid (plasma) rises to the top. After 60
minutes, measurements are taken of the distance the
red cells traveled to settle at the bottom of the tube.
Two methods, the Westergren and the Wintrobe, are
used by laboratories; each method produces slightly
different results. Most laboratories use the Westergren
method.
Normally red cells don’t settle far toward the
bottom of the tube. Many diseases make extra or
abnormal proteins that cause the red cells to move
close together, stack up, and form a column (rouleaux). In a group, red cells are heavier and fall faster.
The faster they fall, the further they settle, and the
higher the ESR.
The ESR test is covered by insurance when medically necessary. Results are usually available the same
or following day.
Preparation
This test requires 7mL–10 mL of blood. A healthcare worker ties a tourniquet on the patient’s upper
arm, locates a vein in the inner elbow region, and
inserts a needle into that vein. Vacuum action draws
the blood through the needle into an attached tube.
Collection of the sample takes only a few minutes.
Aftercare
Discomfort or bruising may occur at the puncture
site. Pressure applied to the puncture site until the
bleeding stops reduces bruising. Warm packs to the
puncture site relieve discomfort. The patient may feel
dizzy or faint.
Normal results
A normal value does not rule out disease. Normal
values for the Westergren method are: Men 0 mm/
hour–15 mm/hour; women 0 mm/hour–20 mm/hour;
and children 0 mm/hour–10 mm/hour.
Abnormal results
The highest ESR levels are usually seen in a cancer
of a certain type of white blood cell (multiple myeloma)
and rheumatoid disease, such as rheumatoid arthritis.
Many other diseases also increase the ESR: infection,
kidney disease, anemia, diseases involving white blood
cells, cancer, and autoimmune and inflammatory
diseases.
Any disease that changes the shape and size of red
blood cells decreases the ESR. Distorted cells, such as
with sickle cell disease, do not stack, and consequently
do not settle far, even in the presence of an ESRassociated disease. Diseases that cause the body to
make less protein or extra red blood cells also decrease
the ESR.