Definition
Esophageal pouches, also known as esophageal
diverticula, are pocket-like structures formed when
the interior space of the esophagus, the tube that connects the mouth to the stomach, protrudes into the
walls that surround it.
Description
The esophagus is a muscular tube that propels
food into the stomach. A defect in the wall of the
esophagus may allow the lining to herniate, creating
a space where food can be caught. Pouches can
appear anywhere between the throat and the stomach. They occur primarily in men and usually
later in life.
Different names for the condition apply to different locations along the esophagus:
 Zenker’s diverticula are pharyngeal pouches, or ones
that occur in the upper neck area at the top of the
esophagus.
 Traction diverticula are a type of mid-esophageal
pouch.
 Epiphrenic diverticula occur at the bottom of the
esophagus near where it enters the stomach.
Causes and symptoms
To propel food into the stomach (or out of it
during vomiting) the esophagus generates internal
pressure just like the bowel. Under certain circumstances, that pressure can herniate the esophageal
lining through a weakness in the wall, creating a
pouch (a balloon squeezed in the hand will herniate
through the fingers in the same way). Pouches are
more common in people who have motility disorders
of the esophagus, swallowing that is not well coordinated and may be spastic. A traction diverticulum can
develop from a scar that pulls the esophagus out of
shape. Food and saliva can collect in all of these
pouches.
Pouches in the neck usually cause bad breath (halitosis) and the regurgitation of swallowed food and
saliva. Some patients with Zenker’s diverticula can
push on their neck and make old food appear in their
mouths. Pouches near the stomach may cause swallowing problems, conditions known as achalasia or
dysphagia. Mid-esophageal pouches usually cause no
symptoms.In the most serious cases, a person may be unable
to swallow because the esophagus is obstructed, or the
esphagus may rupture, spilling its contents into the
chest or neck.
Diagnosis
Difficulty swallowing, bad breath, or food reappearing in the back of the mouth are among the signs
physicians look for when diagnosing this condition.
Sometimes the patient may also experience pain in the
chest resembling a heart attack. A series of x rays
taken while swallowing a contrast agent usually
demonstrates the diverticulum clearly. An esophagoscopy may also be needed to gather more detail.
Manometry, measuring pressures inside the esophagus using a balloon that is passed down it, may help
determine the cause of the diverticula.
Treatment
Treatment for this condition is primarily aimed at
alleviating symptoms. Physicians direct the patient to
eat a bland diet, to chew his or her food thoroughly,
and to drink water after eating to clean out the pouches.
If the condition is severe, several types of surgery are
available to remove the pouches and repair the defects.
If a pouch is due to a stenosis (narrowing) in  the esophagus it may be possible to relieve it by passing a
dilator through it, a process called bougeinage.
Prognosis
The two complications that can render these nuisances dangerous, obstruction and rupture, are emergencies. Both require immediate medical attention.
Other than that, diverticula will usually grow slowly
over the years, gradually increasing the symptoms
they cause.