Definition
Esophageal atresia is a serious birth defect in
which the esophagus, the long tube that connects the
mouth to the stomach, is segmented and closed off at
any point. This condition usually occurs with tracheoesophageal fistula, a condition in which the esophagus is improperly attached to the trachea, the
nearby tube that connects the nasal area to the lungs.
Esophageal atresia occurs in approximately 1 in 4,000
live births.
Description
Failure of an unborn child (fetus) to develop
properly results in birth defects. Many of these defects
involve organs that do not function, or function only
incidentally, before birth, and, as a result, go undetected until the baby is born. In this case, the digestive
tract is unnecessary for fetal growth, since all nutrition
comes from the mother through the placenta and
umbilical cord.
During fetal development, the esophagus and the
trachea arise from the same original tissue. Normally,
the two tubes would form separately (differentiate);
however, in cases of esphageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistulas, they do not, resulting in various malformed configurations. The most common
configuration is the ‘‘C’’ type, in which the upper
part of the esophagus abruptly ends in a blind pouch,
while the lower part attaches itself to the trachea. This
configuration occurs in 85–90% of cases. Esophageal
atresia without involvement of the trachea occurs in
only 8% of cases.
Causes and symptoms
The cause of esophageal atresia, like that of most
birth defects, is unknown.
An infant born with this defect will at first appear
all right, swallowing normally. However, the blind
pouch will begin to fill with mucus and saliva that
would normally pass through the esophagus to the
stomach. These secretions back up into the mouth
and nasal area, causing the baby to drool excessively.
When fed, the baby will also immediately regurgitate
what he or she has eaten. Choking and coughing
may also occur as the baby breaths in the fluid backing
up from the esophagus. Aspiration pneumonia, an
infection of the respiratory system caused by inhalation of the contents of the digestive tract, may also
develop.
Diagnosis
Physicians who suspect esophageal atresia after
being presented with the above symptoms diagnose
the condition using x-ray imaging or by passing a
catheter through the nose and into the esophagus.
Esophageal atresia is indicated if the catheter hits an
obstruction 4–5 in (10–13 cm) from the nostrils.
Treatment
Infants with esophageal atresia are unlikely to
survive without surgery to reconnect the esophagus.
The procedure is done as soon as possible; however,
prematurity, the presence of other birth defects, or
complications of apiration pneumonia may delay surgery. Once diagnosed, the baby will be fed intraveneously until he or she has recovered sufficiently
from the operation. Mucus and saliva will also be
continuously removed via a catheter until recovery
has occured. When surgery is performed, the esophagus is reconnected and, if neccessary, separated from
the trachea. If the two ends of the esophagus are too
far apart to be reattached, tissue from the large intestine is used to join them.
Prognosis
Surgery to correct esophageal atresia is usually
successful. Post-operative complications may include
difficulty swallowing, since the esophagus may not
contract efficiently, and gastrointestinal reflux,
in which the acidic contents of stomach back up
into the lower part of the esophagus, possibly
causing ulcers.