Definition
When there is an increase in the volume of the
tissue behind the eyes, the eyes will appear to bulge out
of the face. The terms exophthalmos and proptosis
apply. Proptosis can refer to any organ that is
displaced forward, while exophthalmos refers just to
the eyes.
Description
The eye socket (orbit) is made of bone and therefore will not yield to increased pressure within it.
Only forward displacement of the eyeball (globe)
will allow more room if tissue behind the eye is
increasing.
Causes and symptoms
The most common cause of exophthalmos is
Graves’ disease, overactivity of the thyroid gland.
The contents of the orbits swell due to inflammation,
forcing the eyes forward. The inflammation affects
primarily the muscles. This combination of muscle
impairment and forward displacement reduces eye
movement, causing double vision and crossed eyes
(strabismus). The optic nerves can also be affected,
reducing vision, and the clear membrane (conjunctiva)
covering the white part of the eyes and lining the inside
of the eyelids can swell. Finally, the eyes may protrude
so far that the eyelids cannot close over them, leading
to corneal damage.
Exophthalmos from Graves’ disease is bilateral
(occurring on both sides), but not necessarily symmetrical. In contrast, exophthalmos from orbital
tumors or a blood clot in the brain happens on
only one side.
Diagnosis
Exophthalmos is obvious when it is advanced
enough to cause complications. When there is doubt
in the early stages, a mechanical device called an
exophthalmometer can measure the protrusion.
Computed tomography scans (CT scans) are of great
value in examining the bony components of the orbit.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanning is equally
valuable for displaying the contents of the orbit,
because it ‘‘sees through’’ the bone.
Treatment
If a tumor is growing behind the eye, it needs
to be removed. If Graves’ disease is the cause, it
may subside with treatment of the overactive thyroid, but this is not guaranteed. Local care to the
front of the eye to keep it moist is necessary if the
eyelid cannot close.
Prognosis
Exophthalmos can be progressive. Its progress
must be carefully followed, treating complications as
they occur.
Prevention
Vision can usually be preserved with attentive
treatment. There is currently no way to prevent any
of the underlying conditions that lead to
exophthalmos.