Definition
External sphincter electromyography helps physicians determine how well the external urinary sphincter muscle is working by measuring the electrical
activity in it during contraction and relaxation.
Purpose
The external sphincter muscle is the ring-like muscle that controls urine release from the bladder. When
a patient cannot voluntarily control urination (incontinence), a physician may order this test to determine if
the problem is caused by the failure of this muscle. The
voluntary contraction or release of a muscle such as
the external sphincter involves a complex process in
which the nerves controlling the muscle signal it to
move through the release and uptake of chemicals
called neurotransmitters and the generation of electrical impulses. This test records the electrical impulses
given off when the muscle contracts or relaxes and
allows the physician to determine if the muscle is
working properly, if it has been damaged by disease,
or some other condition.
Precautions
Patients who are taking muscle relaxants or drugs
that act like or have an effect on the neurotransmitter
acetylcholine (cholinergic or anti-cholinergic drugs)
should tell thedoctor since theywill change the test results.
The results will also be altered if the patient moves during
the test or if the electrodes are improperly placed.
Description
The patient puts on a surgical gown and lies down
on the examining table. The procedure, which takes
between 30–60 minutes, may be conducted one of
three ways:
 Skin electrodes. This is the most commonly used
method of recording information. The skin where
the electrodes will be placed is cleaned and shaved
and an electrically conductive paste is applied. The
electrodes are then taped in place. For female
patients, the electrodes are taped around the urethra,
while for male patients they are placed between the
scrotum and the anus.
 Needle electrodes. This is considered the most accurate method, since the electrodes are inserted directly
 into the muscle, using needles to guide placement.
For male patients, a gloved finger is inserted in the
rectum, then needles with wires attached are inserted
through the skin between the anus and the scrotum.
For female patients, the needles are inserted around
the urethra. The discomfort of placing the needles is
about the same as that of an injection. The needles
are withdrawn, and the wires are taped to the thigh.
 Anal plug electrodes. The tip of an anal plug is
lubricated and inserted into the rectum as the patient
relaxes the anal sphincter. Electrodes are attached to
the anal plug.
Once the electrodes are in place and attached to
the recording device, the patient is asked to alternately
contract and relax the external sphincter muscle. The
electrical activity generated during these contractions
and relaxations is recorded on a graph called an
electromyogram.
Preparation
Before the test, the patient should discuss with the
doctor whether it is necessary to temporarily discontinue any medications, and follow the doctor’s orders.
No changes in diet or activity are necessary.
Aftercare
Women may see some blood in their urine the first
time they urinate after the test. Blood in the urine of
men or blood in the urine of women after the first
urination should be reported the doctor. The patient
should take a warm bath and drink plenty of fluids to
ease any discomfort after the test.
Risks
Complications of external sphincter electromyography are rare. Occasionally patients report blood in
their urine after being tested with needle electrodes.
Also, the urethra may become mildly irritated causing
a change in the normal frequency of urination.
Normal results
In a normally functioning external sphincter muscle, the electromyogram will show increased electrical
activity when the patient tightens the muscle and a
little or no electrical activity when it is relaxed.
Abnormal results
A diseased external sphincter muscle will produce
an abnormal pattern of electrical activity. Conditions
that affect the external sphincter may include multiple
sclerosis, neurogenic bladder, Parkinson’s disease,
spinal cord injury, and stress incontinence. However,
additional tests must be done in order to confirm any
of these diagnoses.