Definition
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO)
is a special procedure that uses an artificial heart-lung
machine to take over the work of the lungs (and sometimes also the heart). ECMO is used most often in
newborns and young children, but it also can be used
as a last resort for adults whose heart or lungs are
failing.
Purpose
In newborns, ECMO is used to support or replace
an infant’s undeveloped or failing lungs by providing
oxygen and removing carbon dioxide waste products
so the lungs can rest. Infants who need ECMO may
include those with:
 meconium aspiration syndrome, (breathing in of a
newborn’s first stool by a fetus or newborn, which
can block air passages and interfere with lung
expansion)
 persistent pulmonary hypertension, (a disorder in
which the blood pressure in the arteries supplying
the lungs is abnormally high)
 respiratory distress syndrome (a lung disorder
usually of premature infants that causes increasing
difficulty in breathing, leading to a life-threatening
deficiency of oxygen in the blood)
 congenital diaphragmatic hernia, (the profusion of
part of the stomach through an opening in the
diaphragm)
 pneumonia
 blood poisoning
ECMO is also used to support a child or adult
patient’s damaged, infected, or failing lungs for a few
hours to allow treatment or healing. It is effective for
those patients with severe, but reversible, heart or lung
problems who haven’t responded to treatment with a
ventilator, drugs, or extra oxygen. Adults and children
who need ECMO usually have one of these problems:
 heart failure
 pneumonia
 respiratory failure caused by trauma or severe
infection
The ECMO procedure can help a patient’s lungs
and heart rest and recover, but it will not cure the
underlying disease. Any patient who requires ECMO
is seriously ill and will likely die without the treatment.
Because there is some risk involved, this method is
used only when other means of support have failed.
Precautions
Typically, ECMO patients have daily chest x rays
and blood work, and constant vital sign monitoring.
They are usually placed on a special rotating bed that
is designed to decrease pressure on the skin and help
move secretions from the lungs.
After the patient is stable on ECMO, the breathing machine settings will be lowered to ‘‘rest’’ settings,
which allows the lungs to rest without the risk of too
much oxygen or pressure from the ventilator.
Description
There are two types of ECMO: Venoarterial
(V-A) ECMO supports the heart and lungs, and is
used for patients with blood pressure or heart functioning problems in addition to respiratory
problems. Venovenous (V-V) ECMO supports the
lungs only.
V-A ECMO requires the insertion of two tubes,
one in the jugular and one in the carotid artery. In the
V-V ECMO procedure, the surgeon places a plastic
tube into the jugular vein through a small incision in
the neck.
Once in place, the tubes are connected to the
ECMO circuit, and then the machine is turned on.
The patient’s blood flows out through the tube and
may look very dark because it contains very little
oxygen. A pump pushes the blood through an artificial
membrane lung, where oxygen is added and carbon
dioxide is removed. The size of the artificial lung
depends on the size of the patient; sometimes adults
need two lungs. The blood is then warmed and
returned to the patient. A steady amount of blood
(called the flow rate) is pushed through the ECMO
machine every minute. As the patient improves, the
flow rate is lowered.
Many patients require heavy sedation while they
are on ECMO to lessen the amount of oxygen needed
by the muscles.
As the patient improves, the amount of ECMO
support will be decreased gradually, until the
machine is turned off for a brief trial period. If the
patient does well without ECMO, the treatment is
stopped.
Typically, newborns remain on ECMO for three
to seven days, although some babies need more time
(especially if they have a diaphragmatic hernia).
Once the baby is off ECMO, he or she will still need
a ventilator (breathing machine) for a few days or
weeks. Adults may remain on ECMO for days to
weeks, depending on the condition of the patient,
but treatment may be continued for a longer time
depending on the type of heart or lung disease, the
amount of damage to the lungs before ECMO was
begun, and the presence of any other illnesses or
health problems.
Preparation
Before ECMO is begun, the patient receives medication to ease pain and restrict movement.
Aftercare
Because infants on ECMO may have been struggling with low oxygen levels before treatment, they
may be at higher risk for developmental problems.
They will need to be monitored as they grow.
Risks
Bleeding is the biggest risk for ECMO patients,
since blood thinners are given to guard against blood
clots. Bleeding can occur anywhere in the body, but is
most serious when it occurs in the brain. This is why
doctors periodically perform ultrasound brain scans
of anyone on ECMO. Stroke, which may be caused by
bleeding or blood clots in the brain, has occurred in
some patients undergoing ECMO.
If bleeding becomes a problem, the patient may
require frequent blood transfusions or operations to
control the bleeding. If the bleeding can’t be stopped,
ECMO will be withdrawn.
Other risks include infection or vocal cord injury.
Some patients develop severe blood infections that
cause irreversible damage to vital organs.
There is a small chance that some part of the
complex equipment may fail, which could introduce
air into the system or affect the patient’s blood levels,
causing damage or death of vital organs (including the
brain). For this reason, the ECMO circuit is constantly monitored by a trained technologist.
Normal results
Lungs and/or heart return to healthy functioning.
Abnormal results
Lungs and/or heart do not improve while on ECMO.