Definition
Ultrasound imaging equipment allows eye specialists (ophthalmologists) to ‘‘see’’ the eye in great detail
without the pain and risk of exploratory surgery, or the
limitations and uncertainty inherent to traditional
visual examination. Ultrasound is used to detect and
diagnose many eye diseases and injuries, to measure
the eye prior to corrective surgery, and directly as a
treatment tool.
Purpose
An ophthalmologist uses ultrasonic imaging to
help diagnose the underlying cause(s) of a patient’s
symptoms, to assess the general condition of an
injured eye, and to measure the eye prior to corrective
surgery. Situations that may call for ultrasonic imaging include:
 Excessive tearing or visible infection. These external
symptoms could indicate a serious underlying problem such as a tumor, an internal infection, the presence of a deeply lodged irritant (foreign body), or
the effects of a previously unrecognized injury. When
presented with general symptoms, ultrasound can
speed diagnosis if a serious condition is suspected.
 Impaired vision. Fuzzy vision, poor night vision,
restricted (tunnel) vision, blind spots, extreme light
sensitivity, and even blindness can all stem from
inner eye conditions ranging from glaucoma and
cataracts, to retinitis, detached retina, tumors, or
impaired blood circulation. Again, high resolution
ultrasound can quickly identify causes and pinpoint
their location. A special type of ultrasound, known
as Doppler, can even perceive and measure circulation in the tiny blood vessels of the eye.
 Eye trauma. The eye can be damaged by a direct
impact or a puncture wound, as a result of a general
head trauma, or by intense light exposure. Even
when the cause of injury is obvious, ultrasound can
reveal the exact type, extent, and location of damage,
from deformations and ruptures to internal bleeding,
and help to guide emergency care efforts.
 Lens replacement surgery. Exact measurement of the
eye’s optical dimensions with ultrasound greatly
improves the visual outcome for cataract patients
receiving permanent synthetic lenses; and for
severely myopic patients receiving implanted corrective lenses.
Ophthalmic ultrasound imaging is also used routinely to guide the precise placement of instruments
during surgery, and can be used directly for the treatment of glaucoma and tumors of the eye.
Precautions
Ultrasound of the eye, properly performed by
qualified personnel using appropriate equipment, has
no risks. There is no evidence to suggest that the
procedure itself poses any threat to a healthy eye, or
worsens the condition of a diseased or injured eye.
Description
Ophthalmic ultrasound equipment sends high
frequency pulses of sound into the eye, where they
bounce off the boundaries between different structures
in the eye and produce a distinctive pattern of echoes.
This echo pattern is received and interpreted by a
computer to produce an image on a television
screen. The time it takes an echo to return to the
receiver corresponds to the depth it traveled into
the eye.
Single transducer (the sound transmitter/receiver)
ultrasound is used to measure distances within the eye.
This is A-mode ultrasound. A linear array of transducers in a single small probe, B-mode, provides a picture
of a cross section through the eye. Doppler mode
ultrasound combines B-mode with the ability to detect
and measure the flow of blood in the tiny vessels of
the eye.
As a direct treatment tool, the vibrations of high
intensity A-mode ultrasound can be used to heat and
erode tumors. The same technique can be used to
control glaucoma by selectively destroying the cells
which produce the fluid that causes the internal pressure of the eye to rise.
The procedure followed in a regular ultrasonic eye
examination is relatively simple. The patient relaxes in
a comfortable chair in a darkened room. Mild anesthetic eye drops are administered and the head is held
secure. The ultrasonic probe, coated with a sterile gel
to ensure good contact, is lightly pressed against the
eye as the images are made. The probe may be applied
to the eyelid or directly to the eye, as necessary. The
patient feels nothing else, and the whole office procedure takes about 15 minutes.
Preparation
Preparation by the patient is generally unnecessary, although under special circumstances an
ophthalmologist may perform pretest procedures.
The ophthalmologist and/or ultrasound technician
will conduct all preparations at the time of the test.
Aftercare
Patients may experience partial and temporary
blurred vision, as well as ‘‘eye strain’’ headaches.
These symptoms usually fade within an hour of the
procedure, during which time patients should rest
their eyes and avoid all activities that require good
eyesight, like driving.
Risks
Improperly focused, high-intensity ultrasound
could burn and physically disrupt delicate eye tissue
and cause injury. This risk is, however, slight and
would arise only from improper use, or as a potential
side effect of tumor or glaucoma treatment.
Normal results
A normal ultrasound scan would indicate a fully
healthy eye. For therapeutic ultrasound, a normal
result would be an improvement in the targeted condition, such as shrinking of a tumor or lessening of
pressure inside the eye of a glaucoma patient.
Abnormal results
Because diagnostic ultrasound is generally used to
investigate symptoms, the results of a scan will often
be abnormal and they will detect evidence of an underlying condition.